Isolating Sources of Disentanglement in VAEs

Ricky T. Q. Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger Grosse, David Duvenaud
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
                                                    
Abstract
We decompose the evidence lower bound to show the existence of a term measuring
the total correlation between latent variables. We use this to motivate the β-TCV AE
(Total Correlation Variational Autoencoder) algorithm, a reﬁnement and plug-in
replacement of the β-V AE for learning disentangled representations, requiring
no additional hyperparameters during training. We further propose a principled
classiﬁer-free measure of disentanglement called the mutual information gap (MIG).
We perform extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments, in both restricted
and non-restricted settings, and show a strong relation between total correlation
and disentanglement, when the model is trained using our framework.
1 Introduction
Learning disentangled representations without supervision is a difﬁcult open problem. Disentangled
variables are generally considered to contain interpretable semantic information and reﬂect separate
factors of variation in the data. While the deﬁnition of disentanglement is open to debate, many
believe a factorial representation, one with statistically independent variables, is a good starting
point [ 1,2,3]. Such representations distill information into a compact form which is oftentimes
semantically meaningful and useful for a variety of tasks [ 2,4]. For instance, it is found that such
representations are more generalizable and robust against adversarial attacks [ 5].
Many state-of-the-art methods for learning disentangled representations are based on re-weighting
parts of an existing objective. For instance, it is claimed that mutual information between latent
variables and the observed data can encourage the latents into becoming more interpretable [ 6]. It
is also argued that encouraging independence between latent variables induces disentanglement
[7]. However, there is no strong evidence linking factorial representations to disentanglement. In
part, this can be attributed to weak qualitative evaluation procedures. While traversals in the latent
representation can qualitatively illustrate disentanglement, quantitative measures of disentanglement
are in their infancy.
In this paper, we:
•show a decomposition of the variational lower bound that can be used to explain the success
of theβ-V AE [ 7] in learning disentangled representations.
•propose a simple method based on weighted minibatches to stochastically train with arbitrary
weights on the terms of our decomposition without any additional hyperparameters.
•introduce the β-TCV AE, which can be used as a plug-in replacement for the β-V AE with no
extra hyperparameters. Empirical evaluations suggest that the β-TCV AE discovers more
interpretable representations than existing methods, while also being fairly robust to random
initialization.
•propose a new information-theoretic disentanglement metric, which is classiﬁer-free and
generalizable to arbitrarily-distributed and non-scalar latent variables.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.β-V AE [ 7]
 β-TCV AE (Our)
(a) Baldness (-6, 6)
 (b) Face width (0, 6)
 (c) Gender (-6, 6)
 (d) Mustache (-6, 0)
Figure 1: Qualitative comparisons on CelebA. Traversal ranges are shown in parentheses. Some
attributes are only manifested in one direction of a latent variable, so we show a one-sided traversal.
Most semantically similar variables from aβ-V AE are shown for comparison.
While Kim & Mnih [ 8] have independently proposed augmenting V AEs with an equivalent total
correlation penalty to the β-TCV AE, their proposed training method differs from ours and requires
an auxiliary discriminator network.
2 Background: Learning and Evaluating Disentangled Representations
We discuss existing work that aims at either learning disentangled representations without supervision
or evaluating such representations. The two problems are inherently related, since improvements
to learning algorithms require evaluation metrics that are sensitive to subtle details, and stronger
evaluation metrics reveal deﬁciencies in existing methods.
2.1 Learning Disentangled Representations
VAE andβ-VAE The variational autoencoder (V AE) [ 9,10] is a latent variable model that pairs a
top-down generator with a bottom-up inference network. Instead of directly performing maximum
likelihood estimation on the intractable marginal log-likelihood, training is done by optimizing the
tractableevidence lower bound(ELBO). We would like to optimize this lower bound averaged over
the empirical distribution (withβ= 1):
Lβ=1
NN 
n=1(Eq[logp(x n|z)]−βKL(q(z|x n)||p(z))) (1)
The β-V AE [ 7] is a variant of the variational autoencoder that attempts to learn a disentangled
representation by optimizing a heavily penalized objective with β> 1. Such simple penalization
has been shown to be capable of obtaining models with a high degree of disentanglement in image
datasets. However, it is not made explicit why penalizing KL(q(z|x)||p(z)) with a factorial prior can
lead to learning latent variables that exhibit disentangled transformations for all data samples.
InfoGAN The InfoGAN [ 6] is a variant of the generative adversarial network (GAN) [ 11] that
encourages an interpretable latent representation by maximizing the mutual information between the
observation and a small subset of latent variables. The approach relies on optimizing a lower bound
of the intractable mutual information.
2.2 Evaluating Disentangled Representations
When the true underlying generative factors are known and we have reason to believe that this
set of factors is disentangled, it is possible to create a supervised evaluation metric. Many have
proposed classiﬁer-based metrics for assessing the quality of disentanglement [ 7,8,12,13,14,15].
2We focus on discussing the metrics proposed in [ 7] and [ 8], as they are relatively simple in design
and generalizable.
The Higgins’ metric [ 7] is deﬁned as the accuracy that a low VC-dimension linear classiﬁer can
achieve at identifying aﬁxed ground truth factor. Speciﬁcally, for a set of ground truth factors
{vk}K
k=1, each training data point is an aggregation over Lsamples:1
L L
l=1|z(1)
l−z(2)
l|, where
random vectors z(1)
l, z(2)
lare drawn i.i.d. from q(z|v k)1for anyﬁxed value of vk, and a classiﬁcation
target k. A drawback of this method is the lack of axis-alignment detection. That is, we believe a truly
disentangled model should only contain one latent variable that is related to each factor. As a means
to include axis-alignment detection, [ 8] proposes using argminjVar q(zj|vk)[zj]and a majority-vote
classiﬁer.
Classiﬁer-based disentanglement metrics tend to bead-hocand sensitive to hyperparameters. The
metrics in [ 7] and [ 8] can be loosely interpreted as measuring the reduction in entropy of zifv
is observed. In section 4, we show that it is possible to directly measure the mutual information
between zandvwhich is a principled information-theoretic quantity that can be used for any latent
distributions provided that efﬁcient estimation exists.
3 Sources of Disentanglement in the ELBO
It is suggested that two quantities are especially important in learning a disentangled representation
[6,7]: A) Mutual information between the latent variables and the data variable, and B) Independence
between the latent variables.
A term that quantiﬁes criterion A was illustrated by an ELBO decomposition [ 16]. In this section, we
introduce a reﬁned decomposition showing that terms describing both criteria appear in the ELBO.
ELBO TC-Decomposition We identify each training example with a unique integer index and
deﬁne a uniform random variable on {1,2, ..., N} with which we relate to data points. Fur-
thermore, we deﬁne q(z|n) =q(z|x n)andq(z, n) =q(z|n)p(n) =q(z|n)1
N. We refer to
q(z) = N
n=1q(z|n)p(n)as theaggregated posteriorfollowing [ 17], which captures the aggregate
structure of the latent variables under the data distribution. With this notation, we decompose the KL
term in ( 1) assuming a factorizedp(z).
Ep(n) 
KL 
q(z|n)||p(z)  
=KL(q(z, n)||q(z)p(n))      
i Index-Code MI+KL 
q(z)|| 
jq(zj) 
      
ii Total Correlation+ 
jKL(q(z j)||p(z j))
      
iii Dimension-wise KL
(2)
wherez jdenotes thejth dimension of the latent variable.
Decomposition Analysis In a similar decomposition [ 16],iis referred to as theindex-code
mutual information(MI). The index-code MI is the mutual information Iq(z;n) between the data
variable and latent variable based on the empirical data distribution q(z, n) . It is argued that a
higher mutual information can lead to better disentanglement [ 6], and some have even proposed to
completely drop the penalty on this term during optimization [ 17,18]. However, recent investigations
into generative modeling also claim that a penalized mutual information through the information
bottleneck encourages compact and disentangled representations [ 3,19].
In information theory, iiis referred to as thetotal correlation(TC), one of many generalizations
of mutual information to more than two random variables [ 20]. The naming is unfortunate as it is
actually a measure of dependence between the variables. The penalty on TC forces the model toﬁnd
statistically independent factors in the data distribution. We claim that a heavier penalty on this term
induces a more disentangled representation, and that the existence of this term is the reason β-V AE
has been successful.
1Note thatq(z|v k)is sampled by using an intermediate data sample:z∼q(z|x), x∼p(x|v k).
3We refer to iiias thedimension-wiseKL. This term mainly prevents individual latent dimensions
from deviating too far from their corresponding priors. It acts as a complexity penalty on the aggregate
posterior which reasonably follows from the minimum description length [ 21] formulation of the
ELBO.
We would like to verify the claim that TC is the most important term in this decomposition for
learning disentangled representations by penalizing only this term; however, it is difﬁcult to estimate
the three terms in the decomposition. In the following section, we propose a simple yet general
framework for training with the TC-decomposition using minibatches of data.
A special case of this decomposition was given in [ 22], assuming that the use of aﬂexible prior can
effectively ignore the dimension-wise KL term. In contrast, our decomposition (2)is more generally
applicable to many applications of the ELBO.
3.1 Training with Minibatch-Weighted Sampling
We describe a method to stochastically estimate the decomposition terms, allowing scalable training
with arbitrary weights on each decomposition term. Note that the decomposed expression (2)requires
the evaluation of the density q(z) =E p(n)[q(z|n)] , which depends on the entire dataset2. As such, it
is undesirable to compute it exactly during training. One main advantage of our stochastic estimation
method is the lack of hyperparameters or inner optimization loops, which should provide more stable
training.
A naïve Monte Carlo approximation based on a minibatch of samples from p(n) is likely to underes-
timate q(z). This can be intuitively seen by viewing q(z) as a mixture distribution where the data
index nindicates the mixture component. With a randomly sampled component, q(z|n) is close to 0,
whereas q(z|n) would be large if nis the component that zcame from. So it is much better to sample
this component and weight the probability appropriately.
To this end, we propose using a weighted version for estimating the function logq(z) during training,
inspired by importance sampling. When provided with a minibatch of samples {n1, ..., n M}, we can
use the estimator
Eq(z)[logq(z)]≈1
MM 
i=1
log1
NMM 
j=1q(z(n i)|nj)
 (3)
where z(n i)is a sample from q(z|n i)(see derivation in Appendix C). This minibatch estimator is
biased, since its expectation is a lower bound3. However, computing it does not require any additional
hyperparameters.
3.1.1 Special case:β-TCVAE
With minibatch-weighted sampling, it is easy to assign different weights ( α,β,γ ) to the terms in (2):
Lβ−TC :=E q(z|n)p(n) [logp(n|z)]−αI q(z;n)−βKL 
q(z)|| 
jq(zj) 
−γ 
jKL(q(z j)||p(z j))
(4)
While we performed ablation experiments with different values for αandγ, we ultimatelyﬁnd that
tuning βleads to the best results. Our proposed β-TCV AE uses α=γ= 1 and only modiﬁes the
hyperparameter β. While Kim & Mnih [ 8] have proposed an equivalent objective, they estimate TC
using an auxiliary discriminator network.
4 Measuring Disentanglement with the Mutual Information Gap
It is difﬁcult to compare disentangling algorithms without a proper metric. Most prior work has
resorted to qualitative analysis by visualizing the latent representation. Another approach relies
on knowing the true generative process p(n|v) and ground truth latent factors v. Often these are
2The same argument holds for the term 
jq(z j)and a similar estimator can be constructed.
3This follows from Jensen’s inequalityE p(n)[logq(z|n)]≤logE p(n)[q(z|n)].
4semantically meaningful attributes of the data. For instance, photographic portraits generally contain
disentangled factors such as pose (azimuth and elevation), lighting condition, and attributes of the
face such as skin tone, gender, face width, etc. Though not all ground truth factors may be provided,
it is still possible to evaluate disentanglement using the known factors. We propose a metric based on
the empirical mutual information between latent variables and ground truth factors.
4.1 Mutual Information Gap (MIG)
Our key insight is that theempirical mutual informationbetween a latent variable zjand a
ground truth factor vkcan be estimated using the joint distribution deﬁned by q(zj, vk) = N
n=1p(vk)p(n|v k)q(z j|n). Assuming that the underlying factors p(vk)and the generating process
is known for the empirical data samplesp(n|v k), then
In(zj;vk) =E q(zj,vk)
log 
n∈X vkq(zj|n)p(n|v k)
+H(z j) (5)
whereX vkis the support ofp(n|v k). (See derivation in Appendix B.)
A higher mutual information implies that zjcontains a lot of information about vk, and the mutual
information is maximal if there exists a deterministic, invertible relationship between zjandvj.
Furthermore, for discrete vk,0≤I(z j;vk)≤H(v k), where H(v k) =E p(vk)[−logp(v k)]is the
entropy ofv k. As such, we use the normalized mutual informationI(z j;vk)/H(v k).
Note that a single factor can have high mutual information with multiple latent variables. We enforce
axis-alignment by measuring the difference between the top two latent variables with highest mutual
information. The full metric we callmutual information gap(MIG) is then
1
KK 
k=11
H(v k) 
In(zj(k);vk)−max
j =j(k)In(zj;vk) 
(6)
where j(k)=argmaxjIn(zj;vk)andKis the number of known factors. MIG is bounded by 0 and 1.
We perform an entire pass through the dataset to estimate MIG.
While it is possible to compute just the average maximal MI,1
K K
k=1In(zk∗;vk)
H(v k), the gap in our
formulation (6)defends against two important cases. Theﬁrst case is related to rotation of the factors.
When a set of latent variables are not axis-aligned, each variable can contain a decent amount of
information regarding two or more factors. The gap heavily penalizes unaligned variables, which is
an indication of entanglement. The second case is related to compactness of the representation. If one
latent variable reliably models a ground truth factor, then it is unnecessary for other latent variables
to also be informative about this factor.
Metric Axis Unbiased General
Higginset al.[ 7] No No No
Kim & Mnih [ 8] Yes No No
MIG (Ours) Yes Yes Yes
Table 1: In comparison to prior metrics, our proposed
MIG detects axis-alignment, is unbiased for all hyper-
parameter settings, and can be generally applied to any
latent distributions provided efﬁcient estimation exists.As summarized in Table 1, our metric de-
tects axis-alignment and is generally appli-
cable and meaningful for any factorized la-
tent distribution, including vectors of mul-
timodal, categorical, and other structured
distributions. This is because the metric is
only limited by whether the mutual informa-
tion can be estimated. Efﬁcient estimation of
mutual information is an ongoing research
topic [ 23,24], but weﬁnd that the simple
estimator (5)can be computed within rea-
sonable amount of time for the datasets we
use. Weﬁnd that MIG can better capture
subtle differences in models compared to existing metrics. Systematic experiments analyzing MIG
and existing metrics are in Appendix G.
5 Related Work
We focus on discussing the learning of disentangled representations in an unsupervised manner.
Nevertheless, we note that inverting generative processes with known disentangled factors through
5weak supervision has been pursued by many. The goal in this case is not perfect inversion but to
distill simpler representation [ 15,25,26,27,28]. Although not explicitly the main motivation, many
unsupervised generative modeling frameworks have explored the disentanglement of their learned
representations [ 9,17,29]. Prior to β-V AE [ 7], some have shown successful disentanglement in
limited settings with few factors of variation [ 1,14,30,31].
As a means to describe the properties of disentangled representations, factorial representations have
been motivated by many [ 1,2,3,22,32,33]. In particular, Appendix B of [ 22] shows the existence of
the total correlation in a similar objective with aﬂexible prior and assuming optimality q(z) =p(z) .
Similarly, [ 34] arrives at the ELBO from an objective that combines informativeness and the total
correlation of latent variables. In contrast, we show a more general analysis of the unmodiﬁed
evidence lower bound.
The existence of the index-code MI in the ELBO has been shown before [ 16], and as a result,
FactorV AE, which uses an equivalent objective to the β-TCV AE, is independently proposed [ 8].
The main difference is they estimate the total correlation using the density ratio trick [ 35] which
requires an auxiliary discriminator network and an inner optimization loop. In contrast, we emphasize
the success of β-V AE using our reﬁned decomposition, and propose a training method that allows
assigning arbitrary weights to each term of the objective without requiring any additional networks.
In a similar vein, non-linear independent component analysis [ 36,37,38] studies the problem of
inverting a generative process assuming independent latent factors. Instead of a perfect inversion, we
only aim for maximizing the mutual information between our learned representation and the ground
truth factors. Simple priors can further encourage interpretability by means of warping complex
factors into simpler manifolds. To the best of our knowledge, we are theﬁrst to show a strong
quantiﬁable relation between factorial representations and disentanglement (see Section 6).
6 Experiments
Dataset Ground truth factors
dSprites scale (6), rotation (40), posX (32), posY (32)
3D Faces azimuth (21), elevation (11), lighting (11)
Table 2: Summary of datasets with known ground truth fac-
tors. Parentheses contain number of quantized values for each
factor.We perform a series of quantitative
and qualitative experiments, show-
ing that β-TCV AE can consistently
achieve higher MIG scores compared
to prior methods β-V AE [ 7] and Info-
GAN [ 6], and can match the perfor-
mance of FactorV AE [ 8] whilst per-
forming better in scenarios where the
density ratio trick is difﬁcult to train.
Furthermore, weﬁnd that in models
trained with our method, total corre-
lation is strongly correlated with disentanglement.4
Independent Factors of VariationFirst, we analyze the performance of our proposedβ-TCV AE
and MIG metric in a restricted setting, with ground truth factors that are uniformly and independently
sampled. To paint a clearer picture on the robustness of learning algorithms, we aggregate results
from multiple experiments to visualize the effect of initialization .
We perform quantitative evaluations with two datasets, a dataset of 2D shapes [ 39] and a dataset of
synthetic 3D faces [ 40]. Their ground truth factors are summarized in Table 2. The dSprites and 3D
faces also contain 3 types of shapes and 50 identities, respectively, which are treated as noise during
evaluation.
ELBO vs. Disentanglement Trade-off Since the β-V AE and β-TCV AE objectives are lower
bounds on the standard ELBO, we would like to see the effect of training with this modiﬁcation.
To see how the choice of βaffects these learning algorithms, we train using a range of values. The
trade-off between density estimation and the amount of disentanglement measured by MIG is shown
in Figure 2.
4Code is available at                                         .
6                                
                                
                                          (a) dSprites
                                  
                                      
                                           (b) 3D Faces
Figure 2: Compared to β-V AE, β-TCV AE creates more disentangled representations while preserving
a better generative model of the data with increasing β. Shaded regions show the 90% conﬁdence
intervals. Higher is better on both metrics.
                                                                                            
(a) dSprites
                                                                                            (b) 3D Faces
Figure 3: Distribution of disentanglement score
(MIG) for different modeling algorithms.
       
                                                
       
            
       (a) dSprites
       
                                   
       
            
       (b) 3D Faces
Figure 4: Scatter plots of the average MIG and TC
per value ofβ. Larger circles indicate a higherβ.
Weﬁnd that β-TCV AE provides a better trade-off between density estimation and disentanglement.
Notably, with higher values of β, the mutual information penality in β-V AE is too strong and this
hinders the usefulness of the latent variables. However, β-TCV AE with higher values of βconsistently
results in models with higher disentanglement score relative toβ-V AE.
We also perform ablation studies on the removal of the index-code MI term by setting α= 0
in(4), and a model using a factorized normalizingﬂow as the prior distribution which is jointly
trained to maximize the modiﬁed objective. Neither resulted in signiﬁcant performance difference,
suggesting that tuning the weight of the TC term in (2)is the most useful for learning disentangled
representations.
Quantitative Comparisons While a disentangled representation may be achievable by some learn-
ing algorithms, the chances of obtaining such a representation typically is not clear. Unsupervised
learning of a disentangled representation can have high variance since disentangled labels are not
provided during training. To further understand the robustness of each algorithm, we show box
plots depicting the quartiles of the MIG score distribution for various methods in Figure 3. We
used β= 4 forβ-V AE and β= 6 forβ-TCV AE, based on modes in Figure 2. For InfoGAN, we
used 5 continuous latent codes and 5 noise variables. Other settings are chosen following those
suggested by [ 6], but we also added instance noise [ 41] to stabilize training. FactorV AE uses an
equivalent objective to the β-TCV AE but is trained with the density ratio trick [ 35], which is known
to underestimate the TC term [ 8]. As a result, we tuned β∈[1,80] and used double the number of
iterations for FactorV AE. Note that while β-V AE, FactorV AE and β-TCV AE use a fully connected
architecture for the dSprites dataset, InfoGAN uses a convolutional architecture for increased stability.
We alsoﬁnd that FactorV AE performs poorly with fully connected layers, resulting in worse results
thanβ-V AE on the dSprites dataset.
In general, weﬁnd that the median score is highest for β-TCV AE and it is close to the highest score
achieved by all methods. Despite the best half of the β-TCV AE runs achieving relatively high scores,
we see that the other half can still perform poorly. Low-score outliers exist in the 3D faces dataset,
although their scores are still higher than the median scores achieved by both V AE and InfoGAN.
Factorial vs. Disentangled Representations While a low total correlation has been previously
conjectured to lead to disentanglement, we provide concrete evidence that our β-TCV AE learning
algorithm satisﬁes this property. Figure 4shows a scatter plot of total correlation and the MIG
7                A
                B
                C
                D
(a) Different joint
distributions of factors.
                                                                         
                   (b) Distribution of disentanglement scores (MIG).
Figure 5: The β-TCV AE has a higher chance of obtaining a disentangled representation than β-
V AE, even in the presence of sampling bias. (a) All samples have non-zero probability in all joint
distributions; the most likely sample is4times as likely as the least likely sample.
disentanglement metric for varying values of βtrained on the dSprites and faces datasets, averaged
over 40 random initializations. For models trained withβ-TCV AE, the correlation between average
TC and average MIG is strongly negative, while models trained with β-V AE have a weaker correlation.
In general, for the same degree of total correlation, β-TCV AE creates a better disentangled model.
This is also strong evidence for the hypothesis that large values of βcan be useful as long as the
index-code mutual information is not penalized.
6.1 Correlated or Dependent Factors
A notion of disentanglement can exist even when the underlying generative process samples factors
non-uniformly and dependently sampled. Many real datasets exhibit this behavior, where some con-
ﬁgurations of factors are sampled more than others, violating the statistical independence assumption.
Disentangling the factors of variation in this case corresponds toﬁnding the generative model where
the latent factors can independently act and perturb the generated result, even when there is bias in
the sampling procedure. In general, weﬁnd that β-TCV AE has no problem inﬁnding the correct
factors of variation in a toy dataset and canﬁnd more interpretable factors of variation than those
found in prior work, even though the independence assumption is violated.
Two Factors We start off with a toy dataset with only two factors and test β-TCV AE using
sampling distributions with varying degrees of correlation and dependence. We take the dataset of
synthetic 3D faces andﬁx all factors other than pose. The joint distributions over factors that we test
with are summarized in Figure 5a, which includes varying degrees of sampling bias. Speciﬁcally,
conﬁguration A uses uniform and independent factors; B uses factors with non-uniform marginals but
are uncorrelated and independent; C uses uncorrelated but dependent factors; and D uses correlated
and dependent factors. While it is possible to train a disentangled model in all conﬁgurations, the
chances of obtaining one is overall lower when there exist sampling bias. Across all conﬁgurations,
we see that β-TCV AE is superior to β-V AE and InfoGAN, and there is a large difference in median
scores for most conﬁgurations.
6.1.1 Qualitative Comparisons
We show qualitatively that β-TCV AE discovers more disentangled factors than β-V AE on datasets of
chairs [ 42] and real faces [ 43].
3D Chairs Figure 6shows traversals in latent variables that depict an interpretable property in
generating 3D chairs. The β-V AE [ 7] has shown to be capable of learning theﬁrst four properties:
azimuth, size, leg style, and backrest. However, the leg style change learned by β-V AE does not seem
to be consistent for all chairs. Weﬁnd that β-TCV AE can learn two additional interpretable properties:
material of the chair, and leg rotation for swivel chairs. These two properties are more subtle and
likely require a higher index-code mutual information, so the lower penalization of index-code MI in
β-TCV AE helps inﬁnding these properties.
8β-V AE
 β-TCV AE
(a) Azimuth
 (b) Chair size
 (c) Leg style
 (d) Backrest
 (e) Material
 (f) Swivel
Figure 6: Learned latent variables using β-V AE and β-TCV AE are shown. Traversal range is (-2, 2).
CelebA Figure 1shows 4 out of 15attributes that are discovered by the β-TCV AE without super-
vision (see Appendix A.3). We traverse up to six standard deviations away from the mean to show
the effect of generalizing the represented semantics of each variable. The representation learned
byβ-V AE is entangled with nuances, which can be shown when generalizing to low probability
regions. For instance, it has difﬁculty rendering complete baldness or narrow face width, whereas the
β-TCV AE shows meaningful extrapolation. The extrapolation of the gender attribute of β-TCV AE
shows that it focuses more on gender-speciﬁc facial features, whereas the β-V AE is entangled with
many irrelevances such as face width. The ability to generalize beyond theﬁrst few standard devia-
tions of the prior mean implies that the β-TCV AE model can generate rare samples such asbald or
mustached females.
7 Conclusion
We present a decomposition of the ELBO with the goal of explaining why β-V AE works. In particular,
weﬁnd that a TC penalty in the objective encourages the model toﬁnd statistically independent
factors in the data distribution. We then designate a special case as β-TCV AE, which can be trained
stochastically using minibatch estimator with no additional hyperparameters compared to the β-V AE.
The simplicity of our method allows easy integration into different frameworks [ 44].To quantitatively
evaluate our approach, we propose a classiﬁer-free disentanglement metric called MIG. This metric
beneﬁts from advances in efﬁcient computation of mutual information [ 23] and enforces compactness
in addition to disentanglement. Unsupervised learning of disentangled representations is inherently
a difﬁcult problem due to the lack of a prior for semantic awareness, but we show some evidence
in simple datasets with uniform factors that independence between latent variables can be strongly
related to disentanglement.
Acknowledgements
We thank Alireza Makhzani, Yuxing Zhang, and Bowen Xu for initial discussions. We also thank
Chatavut Viriyasuthee for pointing out an error in one of our derivations. Ricky would also like to
thank Brendan Shillingford for supplying accommodation at a popular conference.
References
[1]Jürgen Schmidhuber. Learning factorial codes by predictability minimization.Neural Computation,
4(6):863–879, 1992.
[2]Karl Ridgeway. A survey of inductive biases for factorial representation-learning.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.05299, 2016.
[3]Alessandro Achille and Stefano Soatto. On the emergence of invariance and disentangling in deep
representations.arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.01350, 2017.
[4]Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
perspectives.IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828, 2013.
9[5]Alexander A Alemi, Ian Fischer, Joshua V Dillon, and Kevin Murphy. Deep variational information
bottleneck.International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[6]Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan:
Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. InAdvances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2172–2180, 2016.
[7]Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick, Shakir
Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational
framework.International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[8] Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by factorising.arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05983, 2018.
[9]Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes.arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114,
2013.
[10] Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and approxi-
mate inference in deep generative models.arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.4082, 2014.
[11] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. InAdvances in neural information processing
systems, pages 2672–2680, 2014.
[12] Will Grathwohl and Aaron Wilson. Disentangling space and time in video with hierarchical variational
auto-encoders.arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.04440, 2016.
[13] Christopher K. I. Williams Cian Eastwood. A framework for the quantitative evaluation of disentangled
representations.International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[14] Xavier Glorot, Antoine Bordes, and Yoshua Bengio. Domain adaptation for large-scale sentiment clas-
siﬁcation: A deep learning approach. InProceedings of the 28th international conference on machine
learning (ICML-11), pages 513–520, 2011.
[15] Theofanis Karaletsos, Serge Belongie, and Gunnar Rätsch. Bayesian representation learning with oracle
constraints.International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
[16] Matthew D Hoffman and Matthew J Johnson. Elbo surgery: yet another way to carve up the variational
evidence lower bound. InWorkshop in Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference, NIPS, 2016.
[17] Alireza Makhzani, Jonathon Shlens, Navdeep Jaitly, Ian Goodfellow, and Brendan Frey. Adversarial
autoencoders.ICLR 2016 Workshop, International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
[18] Shengjia Zhao, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Infovae: Information maximizing variational autoen-
coders.arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02262, 2017.
[19] Christopher Burgess, Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Loic Matthey, Nick Watters, Guillaume Desjardins, and
Alexander Lerchner. Understanding disentangling in beta-vae.Learning Disentangled Representations:
From Perception to Control Workshop, 2017.
[20] Satosi Watanabe. Information theoretical analysis of multivariate correlation.IBM Journal of research and
development, 4(1):66–82, 1960.
[21] Geoffrey E Hinton and Richard S Zemel. Autoencoders, minimum description length and helmholtz free
energy. InAdvances in neural information processing systems, pages 3–10, 1994.
[22] Alessandro Achille and Stefano Soatto. Information dropout: Learning optimal representations through
noisy computation.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2018.
[23] Ishmael Belghazi, Sai Rajeswar, Aristide Baratin, R Devon Hjelm, and Aaron Courville. MINE: Mutual
information neural estimation.arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.04062, 2018.
[24] David N Reshef, Yakir A Reshef, Hilary K Finucane, Sharon R Grossman, Gilean McVean, Peter J
Turnbaugh, Eric S Lander, Michael Mitzenmacher, and Pardis C Sabeti. Detecting novel associations in
large data sets.science, 334(6062):1518–1524, 2011.
[25] Geoffrey E Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, and Sida D Wang. Transforming auto-encoders. InInternational
Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, pages 44–51. Springer, 2011.
[26] Tejas D Kulkarni, William F Whitney, Pushmeet Kohli, and Josh Tenenbaum. Deep convolutional inverse
graphics network. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2539–2547, 2015.
[27] Brian Cheung, Jesse A Livezey, Arjun K Bansal, and Bruno A Olshausen. Discovering hidden factors of
variation in deep networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6583, 2014.
[28] Ramakrishna Vedantam, Ian Fischer, Jonathan Huang, and Kevin Murphy. Generative models of visually
grounded imagination.International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[29] Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep
convolutional generative adversarial networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.
10[30] Yichuan Tang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Geoffrey Hinton. Tensor analyzers. InInternational Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 163–171, 2013.
[31] Guillaume Desjardins, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Disentangling factors of variation via
generative entangling.arXiv preprint arXiv:1210.5474, 2012.
[32] Greg Ver Steeg and Aram Galstyan. Maximally informative hierarchical representations of high-
dimensional data. InArtiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 1004–1012, 2015.
[33] Abhishek Kumar, Prasanna Sattigeri, and Avinash Balakrishnan. Variational inference of disentangled
latent concepts from unlabeled observations.arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00848, 2017.
[34] Shuyang Gao, Rob Brekelmans, Greg Ver Steeg, and Aram Galstyan. Auto-encoding total correlation
explanation.arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05822, 2018.
[35] Masashi Sugiyama, Taiji Suzuki, and Takafumi Kanamori.Density ratio estimation in machine learning.
Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[36] Pierre Comon. Independent component analysis, a new concept?Signal processing, 36(3):287–314, 1994.
[37] Aapo Hyvärinen and Petteri Pajunen. Nonlinear independent component analysis: Existence and uniqueness
results.Neural Networks, 12(3):429–439, 1999.
[38] Christian Jutten and Juha Karhunen. Advances in nonlinear blind source separation. InProc. of the 4th Int.
Symp. on Independent Component Analysis and Blind Signal Separation, 2003.
[39] Loic Matthey, Irina Higgins, Demis Hassabis, and Alexander Lerchner. dsprites: Disentanglement testing
sprites dataset. https://github.com/deepmind/dsprites-dataset/, 2017.
[40] Pascal Paysan, Reinhard Knothe, Brian Amberg, Sami Romdhani, and Thomas Vetter. A 3d face model for
pose and illumination invariant face recognition. InAdvanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance, 2009.
AVSS’09. Sixth IEEE International Conference on, pages 296–301. Ieee, 2009.
[41] Casper Kaae Sønderby, Jose Caballero, Lucas Theis, Wenzhe Shi, and Ferenc Huszár. Amortised map
inference for image super-resolution.International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[42] Mathieu Aubry, Daniel Maturana, Alexei Efros, Bryan Russell, and Josef Sivic. Seeing 3d chairs: exemplar
part-based 2d-3d alignment using a large dataset of cad models. InCVPR, 2014.
[43] Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3730–3738, 2015.
[44] Jin Xu and Yee Whye Teh. Controllable semantic image inpainting.arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05953,
2018.
11