NAS-Bench-101: Towards Reproducible Neural Architecture Search

Chris Ying* 1Aaron Klein* 2Esteban Real1Eric Christiansen1Kevin Murphy1Frank Hutter2
Abstract
Recent advances in neural architecture search
(NAS) demand tremendous computational re-
sources, which makes it difﬁcult to reproduce
experiments and imposes a barrier-to-entry to re-
searchers without access to large-scale computa-
tion. We aim to ameliorate these problems by in-
troducing NAS-Bench-101, the ﬁrst public archi-
tecture dataset for NAS research. To build NAS-
Bench-101, we carefully constructed a compact,
yet expressive, search space, exploiting graph iso-
morphisms to identify 423k unique convolutional
architectures. We trained and evaluated all of
these architectures multiple times on CIFAR-10
and compiled the results into a large dataset of
over 5 million trained models. This allows re-
searchers to evaluate the quality of a diverse range
of models in milliseconds by querying the pre-
computed dataset. We demonstrate its utility by
analyzing the dataset as a whole and by bench-
marking a range of architecture optimization al-
gorithms.
1. Introduction
Many successes in deep learning (Krizhevsky et al., 2012;
Goodfellow et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014) have re-
sulted from novel neural network architecture designs. For
example, in the ﬁeld of image classiﬁcation, research has
produced numerous ways of combining neural network lay-
ers into unique architectures, such as Inception modules
(Szegedy et al., 2015), residual connections (He et al., 2016),
or dense connections (Huang et al., 2017). This prolifera-
tion of choices has fueled research into neural architecture
search (NAS) , which casts the discovery of new architec-
*Equal contribution1Google Brain, Mountain
View, California, USA2Department of Computer Sci-
ence, University of Freiburg, Germany. Correspon-
dence to: Chris Ying <contact@chrisying.net >, Aaron
Klein <kleinaa@cs.uni-freiburg.de >, Esteban Real
<ereal@google.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).tures as an optimization problem (Baker et al., 2017; Zoph
& Le, 2016; Real et al., 2017; Elsken et al., 2019). This
has resulted in state of the art performance in the domain
of image classiﬁcation (Zoph et al., 2018; Real et al., 2018;
Huang et al., 2018), and has shown promising results in
other domains, such as sequence modeling (Zoph & Le,
2016; So et al., 2019).
Unfortunately, NAS research is notoriously hard to repro-
duce (Li & Talwalkar, 2019; Sciuto et al., 2019). First,
some methods require months of compute time ( e.g., Zoph
et al., 2018), making these methods inaccessible to most
researchers. Second, while recent improvements (Liu et al.,
2018a; Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018b) have yielded
more efﬁcient methods, different methods are not compa-
rable to each other due to different training procedures and
different search spaces, which make it difﬁcult to attribute
the success of each method to the search algorithm itself.
To address the issues above, this paper introduces NAS-
Bench-101, the ﬁrst architecture-dataset for NAS. To build
it, we trained and evaluated a large number of different con-
volutional neural network (CNN) architectures on CIFAR-
10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), utilizing over 100 TPU
years of computation time. We compiled the results into a
large table which maps 423k unique architectures to metrics
including run time and accuracy. This enables NAS experi-
ments to be run via querying a table instead of performing
the usual costly train and evaluate procedure. Moreover, the
data, search space, and training code is fully public1, to
foster reproducibility in the NAS community.
Because NAS-Bench-101 exhaustively evaluates a search
space, it permits, for the ﬁrst time, a comprehensive analysis
of a NAS search space as a whole. We illustrate such po-
tential by measuring search space properties relevant to
architecture search. Finally, we demonstrate its application
to the analysis of algorithms by benchmarking a wide range
of open source architecture/hyperparameter search meth-
ods, including evolutionary approaches, random search, and
Bayesian optimization.
In summary, our contributions are the following:
We introduce NAS-Bench-101, the ﬁrst large-scale, open-
1Data and code for NAS-Bench-101 available at https://
github.com/google-research/nasbench .arXiv:1902.09635v2  [cs.LG]  14 May 2019NAS-Bench-101
source architecture dataset for NAS (Section 2);
We illustrate how to use the dataset to analyze the nature
of the search space, revealing insights which may guide
the design of NAS algorithms (Section 3);
We illustrate how to use the dataset to perform fast bench-
marking of various open-source NAS optimization algo-
rithms (Section 4).
2. The NASBench Dataset
The NAS-Bench-101 dataset is a table which maps neural
network architectures to their training and evaluation met-
rics. Most NAS approaches to date have trained models on
the CIFAR-10 classiﬁcation set because its small images
allow relatively fast neural network training. Furthermore,
models which perform well on CIFAR-10 tend to perform
well on harder benchmarks, such as ImageNet (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) when scaled up (Zoph et al., 2018)). For these
reasons, we also use CNN training on CIFAR-10 as the basis
of NAS-Bench-101.
2.1. Architectures
Similar to other NAS approaches, we restrict our search
for neural net topologies to the space of small feedforward
structures, usually called cells, which we describe below.
We stack each cell 3 times, followed by a downsampling
layer, in which the image height and width are halved via
max-pooling and the channel count is doubled. We repeat
this pattern 3 times, followed by global average pooling and
a ﬁnal dense softmax layer. The initial layer of the model
is a stem consisting of one 33convolution with 128
output channels. See Figure 1, top-left, for an illustration
of the overall network structure. Note that having a stem
followed by stacks of cells is a common pattern both in
hand-designed image classiﬁers (He et al., 2016; Huang
et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2018) and in NAS search spaces for
image classiﬁcation. Thus, the variation in the architectures
arises from variation in the cells.
The space of cell architectures consists of all possible di-
rected acyclic graphs on Vnodes, where each possible node
has one ofLlabels, representing the corresponding opera-
tion. Two of the vertices are specially labeled as operation
INandOUT, representing the input and output tensors to
the cell, respectively. Unfortunately, this space of labeled
DAGs grows exponentially in both VandL. In order to
limit the size of the space to allow exhaustive enumeration,
we impose the following constraints:
We setL= 3, using only the following operations:
–33convolution
–11convolution
–33max-pool
We limitV7.
We limit the maximum number of edges to 9.
conv stemstack 1stack 2stack 3
downsampledownsampleglobal avg pooldense
cell 
2-3
cell 
2-2
cell 
2-1
in1x1 3x3 3x3 3x3 
MP out
in1x1 
3x3 3x3 
MP 3x3 out
inout
F= 
64F= 
64
F= 
64+
&
F= 
64
1x1 proj 1x1 proj1x1 proj +
1x1 projF=128
F=128Figure 1: (top-left) The outer skeleton of each model. (top-
right) An Inception-like cell with the original 5x5 convolu-
tion approximated by two 3x3 convolutions (concatenation
and projection operations omitted). (bottom-left) The cell
that attained the lowest mean test error (projection layers
omitted). (bottom-right) An example cell that demonstrates
how channel counts are automatically determined (“+” de-
notes addition and “&” denotes concatenation; 11projec-
tions are used to scale channel counts).
All convolutions utilize batch normalization followed by
ReLU. These constraints were chosen to ensure that the
search space still contains ResNet-like and Inception-like
cells (He et al., 2016; Szegedy et al., 2016). An example of
an Inception-like cell is illustrated in Figure 1, top-right. We
intentionally use convolutions instead of separable convolu-
tions to match the original designs of ResNet and Inception,
although this comes as the cost of being more parameter-
heavy than some of the more recent state-of-the-art archi-
tectures like AmoebaNet (Real et al., 2018).
2.2. Cell encoding
There are multiple ways to encode a cell and different en-
codings may favor certain algorithms by biasing the search
space. For most of our experiments, we chose to use a very
general encoding: a 7-vertex directed acyclic graph, rep-
resented by a 77upper-triangular binary matrix, and a
list of 5 labels, one for each of the 5 intermediate vertices
(recall that the input and output vertices are ﬁxed) Since
there are 21 possible edges in the matrix and 3 possible
operations for each label, there are 22135510Mtotal
unique models in this encoding. In Supplement S3, we alsoNAS-Bench-101
discuss an alternative encoding.
However, a large number of models in this space are invalid
(i.e., there is no path from the input vertex, or the number of
total edges exceeds 9). Furthermore, different graphs in this
encoding may not be computationally unique. The method
which we used to identify and enumerate unique graphs is
described in Supplement S1. After de-duplication, there are
approximately 423k unique graphs in the search space.
2.3. Combine semantics
Translating from the graph to the corresponding neural net-
work is straightforward, with one exception. When multiple
edges point to the same vertex, the incoming tensors must
be combined. Adding them or concatenating them are both
standard techniques. To support both ResNet and Inception-
like cells and to keep the space tractable, we adopted the
following ﬁxed rule: tensors going to the output vertex
are concatenated and those going into other vertices are
summed. The output tensors from the input vertex are pro-
jected in order to match the expected input channel counts
of the subsequent operations. This is illustrated in Figure 1,
bottom-right.
2.4. Training
The training procedure forms an important part of an ar-
chitecture search benchmark, since different training proce-
dures can lead to very substantial performance differences.
To counter this issue and allow comparisons of NAS algo-
rithms on equal grounds, we designed and open-sourced a
single general training pipeline for all models in the dataset.
Choice of hyperparameters. We utilize a single, ﬁxed set
of hyperparameters for all NAS-Bench-101 models. This set
of hyperparameters was chosen to be robust across different
architectures by performing a coarse grid search optimiz-
ing the average accuracy of a set of 50 randomly-sampled
architectures from the space. This is similar to standard
practice in the literature (Zoph et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018a;
Real et al., 2018) and is further justiﬁed by our experimental
analysis in Section 5.1.
Implementation details. All models are trained and evalu-
ated on CIFAR-10 (40k training examples, 10k validation
examples, 10k testing examples), using standard data aug-
mentation techniques (He et al., 2016). The learning rate
is annealed via cosine decay (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017)
to 0 in order to reduce the variance between multiple inde-
pendent training runs. Training is performed via RMSProp
(Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) on the cross-entropy loss with
L2 weight decay. All models were trained on the TPU v2 ac-
celerator. The code, implemented in TensorFlow, along with
all chosen hyperparameters, is publicly available at https:
//github.com/google-research/nasbench .3 repeats and 4 epoch budgets. We repeat the train-
ing and evaluation of all architectures 3 times to ob-
tain a measure of variance. Also, in order to allow the
evaluation of multi-ﬁdelity optimization methods, e.g.,
Hyperband (Li et al., 2018)), we trained all our archi-
tectures with four increasing epoch budgets: Estop2
fEmax=33;Emax=32;Emax=3;Emaxg=f4;12;36;108g
epochs. In each case, the learning rate is annealed to 0 by
epochEstop.2We thus trained 3423k1:27Mmodels
for each value of Estop, and thus 41:27M5Mmodels
overall.
2.5. Metrics
We evaluated each architecture Aafter training three times
with different random initializations, and did this for each
of the 4budgetsEstopabove. As a result, the dataset is
a mapping from the (A;E stop;trial #)to the following
quantities:
training accuracy;
validation accuracy;
testing accuracy;
training time in seconds; and
number of trainable model parameters.
Only metrics on the training and validation set should be
used to search models within a single NAS algorithm, and
testing accuracy should only be used for an ofﬂine evalu-
ation. The training time metric allows benchmarking al-
gorithms that optimize for accuracy while operating under
a time limit (Section 4) and also allows the evaluation of
multi-objective optimization methods. Other metrics that do
not require retraining can be computed using the released
code.
2.6. Benchmarking methods
One of the central purposes of the dataset is to facilitate
benchmarking of NAS algorithms. This section establishes
recommended best practices for using NAS-Bench-101
which we followed in our subsequent analysis; we also
refer to Supplement S6 for a full set of best practices in
benchmarking with NAS-Bench-101.
The goal of NAS algorithms is to ﬁnd architectures that
have high testing accuracy at epoch Emax. To do this, we
repeatedly query the dataset at (A;E stop)pairs, where Ais
an architecture in the search space and Estopis an allowed
number of epochs ( Estop2f4;12;36;108g). Each query
does a look-up using a random trial index, drawn uniformly
2Instead of 4 epoch budgets, we could have trained single
long runs and used the performance at intermediate checkpoints
as benchmarking data for early stopping algorithms. However,
because of the learning rate schedule, such checkpoints would have
occurred when the learning rates are still high, leading to noisy
accuracies that do not correlate well with the ﬁnal performance.NAS-Bench-101
at random fromf1;2;3g, to simulate the stochasticity of
SGD training.
While searching, we keep track of the best architecture ^Ai
the algorithm has found after each function evaluation i, as
ranked by its validation accuracy . To best simulate real
world computational constratints, we stop the search run
when the total “training time” exceeds a ﬁxed limit. After
each complete search rollout, we query the corresponding
mean test accuracy f(^Ai)for that model (test accuracy
should never be used to guide the search itself). Then we
compute the immediate test regret: r(^Ai) =f(^Ai) f(A),
whereAdenotes the model with the highest mean test
accuracy in the entire dataset. This regret becomes the score
for the search run. To measure the robustness of different
search algorithms, a large number of independent search
rollouts should be conducted.
3. NASBench as a Dataset
In this section, we analyze the NAS-Bench-101 dataset
as a whole to gain some insight into the role of neural
network operations and cell topology in the performance
of convolutional neural networks. In doing so, we hope to
shed light on the loss landscape that is traversed by NAS
algorithms.
3.1. Dataset statistics
First we study the empirical cumulative distribution (ECDF)
of various metrics across all architectures in Figure 2. Most
of the architectures converge and reach 100% training ac-
curacy. The validation accuracy and test accuracy are both
above 90% for a majority of models. The best architec-
ture in our dataset (Figure 1) achieved a mean test ac-
curacy of 94:32%. For comparison, the ResNet-like and
Inception-like cells attained 93:12% and92:95%, respec-
tively, which is roughly in-line with the performance of the
original ResNet-56 ( 93:03%) on CIFAR-10 (He et al., 2016).
We observed that the correlation between validation and test
accuracy is extremely high ( r= 0:999) at 108 epochs which
suggests that strong optimizers are unlikely to overﬁt on the
validation error. Due to the stochastic nature of the training
process, training and evaluating the same architecture will
generally lead to a small amount of noise in the accuracy.
We also observe, as expected, that the noise between runs is
lower at longer training epochs.
Figure 3 investigates the relationship between the number
of parameters, training time, and validation accuracy of
models in the dataset. The left plot suggests that there is
positive correlation between all of these quantities. However
parameter count and training time are not the only factors
since the best cell in the dataset is not the most computa-
tionally intensive one. Hand-designed cells, such as ResNet
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
accuracy0.00.51.0ECDFtest
train
valid
10−410−310−210−1
noise0.00.51.0ECDF4 epochs
12 epochs
36 epochs
108 epochsFigure 2: The empirical cumulative distribution (ECDF)
of all valid conﬁgurations for: (left) the train/valid/test ac-
curacy after training for 108 epochs and (right) the noise,
deﬁned as the standard deviation of the test accuracy be-
tween the three trials, after training for 12, 36 and 108
epochs.
Figure 3: (left) Training time vs. trainable parameters, color-
coded by validation accuracy. (right) Validation accuracy
vs. training time with select cell architectures highlighted.
Inception neighbors are the graphs which are 1-edit distance
away from the Inception cell.
and Inception, perform near the Pareto frontier of accuracy
over cost, which suggests that topology and operation selec-
tion are critical for ﬁnding both high-accuracy and low-cost
models.
3.2. Architectural design
NAS-Bench-101 presents us with the unique opportunity to
investigate the impact of various architectural choices on the
performance of the network. In Figure 4, we study the effect
of replacing each of the operations in a cell with a different
operation. Not surprisingly, replacing a 33convolution
with a 11convolution or 33max-pooling operation
generally leads to a drop in absolute ﬁnal validation accuracy
by1:16% and1:99%, respectively. This is also reﬂected
in the relative change in training time, which decreases by
14:11% and9:84%. Even though 33max-pooling is
parameter-free, it appears to be on average 5:04% more
expensive in training time than 11convolution and also
has an average absolute validation accuracy 0:81% lower.
However, some of the top cells in the space (ranked by mean
test accuracy, i.e., Figure 1) contain max-pool operations, so
other factors must also be at play and replacing all 33max-NAS-Bench-101
Figure 4: Measuring the aggregated impact of replacing one
operation with another on (left) absolute validation accuracy
and (right) relative training time.
Figure 5: Comparing mean validation accuracy and training
time for cells by (left) depth, measured by length of longest
path from inpu to output, and (right) width, measured by
maximum directed cut on the graph.
pooling operations with 11convolutions is not necessarily
a globally optimal choice.
In Figure 5, we also investigate the role of depth vs. width.
In terms of average validation accuracy, it appears that a
depth of 3 is optimal whereas increasing width seems to in-
crease the validation accuracy up to 5, the maximum width
of networks in the dataset. The training time of networks
increases as networks get deeper and wider with one ex-
ception: width 1 networks are the most expensive. This
is a consequence of the combine semantics (see Section
2.3), which skews the training time distributions because all
width 1 networks are simple feed-forward networks with no
branching, and thus the activation maps are never split via
their channel dimension.
3.3. Locality
NASBench exhibits locality , a property by which architec-
tures that are “close by” tend to have similar performance
metrics. This property is exploited by many search algo-
rithms. We deﬁne “closeness” in terms of edit-distance : the
smallest number of changes required to turn one architecture
into another; one change entails ﬂipping the operation at a
vertex or the presence/absence of an edge. A popular mea-sure of locality is the random-walk autocorrelation (RWA),
deﬁned as the autocorrelation of the accuracies of points vis-
ited as we perform a long walk of random changes through
the space (Weinberger, 1990; Stadler, 1996). The RWA
(Figure 6, left) shows high correlations for lower distances,
indicating locality. The correlations become indistinguish-
able from noise beyond a distance of about 6.
Figure 6: (left) RWA for the full space and the FDC relative
to the global maximum. To plot both curves on a common
horizontal axis, the autocorrelation curve is drawn as a func-
tion of the square root of the autocorrelation shift, to account
for the fact that a random walk reaches a mean distancep
N
afterNsteps. (right) Fraction of the search space volume
that lies within a given distance to the closest high peak.
While the RWA aggregates across the whole space, we can
also consider regions of particular interest. For example,
Figure 3 (right) displays the neighbors of the Inception-
like cell, indicating a degree of locality too, especially in
terms of accuracy. Another interesting region is that around
a global accuracy maximum. To measure locality within
this neighborhood, we used the ﬁtness-distance correlation
metric (FDC, Jones et al. (1995)). Figure 6 (left) shows that
there is locality around the global maximum as well and the
peak also has a coarse-grained width of about 6.
More broadly, we can consider how rare it is to be near a
global maximum. In the cell encoding described in Sec-
tion 2.2, the best architecture ( i.e., the one with the highest
mean testing accuracy) has 4 graph isomorphisms, produc-
ing 4 distinct peaks in our encoded search space. Moreover
there are 11 other architectures whose mean test accuracy
is within 2 times standard error of the mean of the best
graph. Including the isomorphisms of these, too, there are
11 570 points in the 510M-point search space corresponding
to these top graphs , meaning that the chance of hitting one
of them with a random sample is about 1 to 50000. Figure 6
(right) shows how much volume of the search space lies
near these graphs; in particular, 35.4% of the search space is
within a distance of 6 from the closest top graph. Since the
basin of attraction for local search appears to have a width
of about 6, this suggests that locality-based search may be a
good choice for this space.NAS-Bench-101
4. NASBench as a Benchmark
4.1. Comparing NAS algorithms
In this section we establish baselines for future work by
using our dataset to compare some popular algorithms for
which open source code is available. Note that the intention
is not to answer the question “ Which methods work best on
this benchmark? ”, but rather to demonstrate the utility of a
reproducible baseline.
We benchmarked a small set of NAS and hyperparame-
ter optimization (HPO) algorithms with publicly available
implementations: random search (RS) (Bergstra & Ben-
gio, 2012), regularized evolution (RE) (Real et al., 2018),
SMAC (Hutter et al., 2011), TPE (Bergstra et al., 2011),
Hyperband (HB) (Li et al., 2018), and BOHB (Falkner et al.,
2018). We follow the guidelines established in Section 2.6.
Due to its recent success for NAS (Zoph & Le, 2016), we
also include our own implementation of reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) as an additional baseline, since an ofﬁcial imple-
mentation is not available. However, instead of using an
LSTM controller, which we found to perform worse, we
used a categorical distribution for each parameter and op-
timized the probability values directly with REINFORCE.
Supplement S2 has additional implementation details for all
methods.
NAS algorithms based on weight sharing (Pham et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2018b) or network morphisms (Cai et al.,
2018; Elsken et al., 2018) cannot be directly evaluated
on the dataset, so we did not include them. We also do
not include Gaussian process–based HPO methods (Shahri-
ari et al., 2016), such as Spearmint (Snoek et al., 2012),
since they tend to have problems in high-dimensional dis-
crete optimization tasks (Eggensperger et al., 2013). While
Bayesian optimization methods based on Bayesian neural
networks (Snoek et al., 2015; Springenberg et al., 2016)
are generally applicable to this benchmark, we found their
computational overhead compared to the other methods
to be prohibitively expensive for an exhaustive empirical
evaluation. The benchmarking scripts we used are publicly
available3. For all optimizers we investigate their own main
meta-parameters in Supplement S2.2 (except for TPE where
the open-source implementation does not allow to change
the meta-parameters) and report here the performance based
on the best found settings.
Figure 7 (left) shows the mean performance of each of these
NAS/HPO algorithms across 500 independent trials. The
x-axis shows estimated wall-clock time , counting the evalua-
tion of each architecture with the time that the corresponding
training run took. Note that the evaluation of 500 trials of
each NAS algorithm (for up to 10M simulated TPU sec-
onds, i.e., 115 TPU days each) was only made possible by
3https://github.com/automl/nas_benchmarksvirtue of our tabular benchmark; without it, they would have
amounted to over 900 TPU years of computation.
We make the following observations:
RE, BOHB, and SMAC perform best and start to outper-
form RS after roughly 50 000 TPU seconds (the equiva-
lent of roughly 25 evaluated architectures); they achieved
the ﬁnal performance of RS about 5 times faster and
continued to improve beyond this point.
SMAC, as a Bayesian optimization method, performs
this well despite the issue of invalid architectures; we
believe that this is due to its robust random forest model.
SMAC is slightly slower in the beginning of the search;
we assume that this is due to its internal incumbent esti-
mation procedure (which evaluates the same architecture
multiple times).
The other Bayesian optimization method, TPE, struggles
with this benchmark, with its performance falling back to
random search.
The multi-ﬁdelity optimization algorithms HB and BO-
HB do not yield the speedups frequently observed com-
pared to RS or Bayesian optimization. We attribute this
to the relatively low rank-correlation between the perfor-
mance obtained with different budgets (see Figure 7 in
Supplement S2).
BOHB achieves the same test regret as SMAC and RE
after recovering from misleading early evaluations; we
attribute this to the fact, that, compared to TPE, it uses a
multivariate instead of a univariate kernel density estima-
tor.
Even though RL starts outperforming RS at roughly the
same time as the other methods, it converges much slower
towards the global optimum.
Besides achieving good performance, we argue that robust-
ness, i.e., how sensitive an optimizer is to the randomness
in both the search algorithm and the training process, plays
an important role in practice for HPO and NAS methods.
This aspect has been neglected in the NAS literature due
to the extreme cost of performing many repeated runs of
NAS experiments, but with NAS-Bench-101 performing
many repeats becomes trivial. Figure 7 (right) shows the
empirical cumulative distribution of the regret after 10M
seconds across all 500 runs of each method. For all meth-
ods, the ﬁnal test regrets ranged over roughly an order of
magnitude, with RE, BOHB, and SMAC showing the most
robust performance.
4.2. Generalization bootstrap
To test the generalization of our ﬁndings on the dataset, we
ideally would need to run the benchmarked algorithms on
a larger space of architectures. However, due to computa-
tional limitations, it is infeasible for us to run a large number
of NAS trials on a meaningfully larger space. Instead, to
provide some preliminary evidence of generalization, weNAS-Bench-101
101102103104105106107
estimated wall-clock time (seconds)10−310−2test regret
HB∗
RS
SMAC
TPE
RE
BOHB∗
RL
10−310−2
ﬁnal test regret0.00.20.40.60.81.0CDFHB∗
RS
SMAC
TPE
RE
BOHB∗
RL
Figure 7: (left) Comparison of the performance of various search algorithms. The plot shows the mean performance of 500
independent runs as a function of the estimated training time. (right) Robustness of different optimization methods with
respect to the seed for the random number generator. *HB and BO-HB are budget-aware algorithms which query the dataset
a shorter epoch lengths. The remaining methods only query the dataset at the longest length (108 epochs).
perform a bootstrapped experiment: we set aside a subset
of NAS-Bench-101, dubbed NAS-Bench-Mini, and com-
pare the outcomes of algorithms run on NAS-Bench-Mini
compared to the full NAS-Bench-101. NAS-Bench-Mini
contains all cells within the search space that utilize 6or
fewer vertices ( 64:5kunique cells), compared to the full
NAS-Bench-101 that uses up to 7vertices ( 423kunique
cells).
We compare two very similar algorithms (regularized evolu-
tion, RE, and non-regularized evolution, NRE) to a baseline
(random search, RS). RE and NRE are identical except that
RE removes the oldest individual in a population to main-
tain the population size whereas NRE removes the lowest
ﬁtness individual. Figure 8 (top) shows the comparison
on NAS-Bench-Mini and NAS-Bench-101 on 100 trials of
each algorithm to a ﬁxed time budget. The plots show that
the rankings of the three algorithms (RS <NRE<RE)
are consistent across the smaller dataset and the larger one.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that NAS-Bench-Mini can
generalize to NAS-Bench-101 for different hyperparame-
ter settings of a single algorithm (regularized evolution)
in Figure 8 (middle, bottom). This suggests that conclu-
sions drawn from NAS-Bench-101 may generalize to larger
search spaces.
5. Discussion
In this section, we discuss some of the choices we made
when designing NAS-Bench-101.
5.1. Relationship to hyperparameter optimization
All models in NAS-Bench-101 were trained with a ﬁxed
set of hyperparameters. In this section, we justify that
choice. The problem of hyperparameter optimization (HPO)
is closely intertwined with NAS. NAS aims to discover goodneural network architectures while HPO involves ﬁnding
the best set of training hyperparameters for a given archi-
tecture. HPO operates by tuning various numerical neural
network training parameters ( e.g., learning rate) as well as
categorical choices ( e.g., optimizer type) to optimize the
training process. Formally, given an architecture A, the task
of HPO is to ﬁnd its optimal hyperparameter conﬁguration
H:
H(A) = arg max
Hf(A;H );
wherefis a performance metric, such as validation accu-
racy and the arg max is over all possible hyperparameter
conﬁgurations. The “pure” NAS problem can be formu-
lated as ﬁnding an architecture Awhen all architectures
are evaluated under optimal hyperparameter choices:
A= arg max
Af(A;H(A));
In practice, this would involve running an inner HPO search
for each architecture, which is computationally intractable.
We therefore approximate AwithAy:
AAy= arg max
Af(A;Hy);
whereHyis a set of hyperparameters that has been es-
timated by maximizing the average accuracy on a small
subsetSof the architectures:
Hy(S) = arg max
Hff(A;H ) :A2Sg:
For example, in Section 2.4, Swas a random sample of 50
architectures.
To justify the approximation above, we performed a study
on a different set of NAS-HPO-Bench (Klein & Hutter,
2019) datasets (described in detail in Supplement S5) These
are smaller datasets of architecture–hyperparameter pairsNAS-Bench-101
Figure 8: Generalization bootstrap experiments. Each line
marks the median of 100 runs and the shaded region is
the 25% to 75% interquartile range. (top) Comparing ran-
dom search (RS), non-regularized evolution (NRE), and
regularized evolution (RE) against NAS-Bench-Mini and
NAS-Bench-101. (middle) Comparing RE runs with dif-
ferent mutation rates. (bottom) Comparing RE runs with
different tournament sizes.
(A;H ), where we computed f(A;H )for all settings of
AandH. This let us compute the exact hyperparameter-
optimized accuracy, f(A) = max Hf(A;H ):We can also
measure how well this correlates with the approximation we
use in NAS-Bench-101. To do this, we chose a set of hyper-
parametersHyby optimizing the mean accuracy across all
of the architectures for a given dataset. This allows us to
map each architecture Ato its approximate hyperparameter-
optimized accuracy, fy(A) =f(A;Hy):(This approximate
accuracy is analogous to the one computed in the NAS-
Bench-101 metrics, except there the average was over 50
random architectures, not all of them.)
We ﬁnd that fyandfare quite strongly correlated across
models, with a Spearman rank correlation of 0:9155 ; Fig-
ure 9 provides a scatter plot of fagainstfyfor the archi-
tectures. The ranking is especially consistent for the best
architectures (points near the origin).
0 25 50 75 100 125 150
rank arch with ﬁxed hp050100150 rank arch with best hp
Figure 9: Scatter plot between ranks of f(vertical axis)
andfy(horizontal axis) on the NAS-HPO-Bench-Protein
dataset. Ideally, the points should be close to the diagonal.
The high correlation at low-rank means the best architec-
tures are ranked identically when using HandHy.
5.2. Absolute accuracy of models
The choice of search space, hyperparameters, and training
techniques were designed to ensure that NAS-Bench-101
would be feasible to compute with our resources. Unfortu-
nately, this means that the models we evaluate do not reach
current state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR-10. This is
primarily because: (1) the search space is constrained in
both size and selection of operations and does not contain
more complex architectures, such as those used by NASNet
(Zoph et al., 2018); (2) We do not apply the expensive “aug-
mentation trick” (Zoph et al., 2018) by which models’ depth
and width are increased by a large amount and the train-
ing lengthened to hundreds of epochs; and (3) we do not
utilize more advanced regularization like Cutout (DeVries
& Taylor, 2017), ScheduledDropPath (Zoph et al., 2018)
and decoupled weight decay (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019)
in order to keep our training pipeline similar to previous
standardized models like ResNet.
6. Conclusion
We introduced NAS-Bench-101, a new tabular benchmark
for neural architecture search that is inexpensive to evalu-
ate but still preserves the original NAS optimization prob-
lem, enabling us to rigorously compare various algorithms
quickly and without the enormous computational budgets
often used by projects in the ﬁeld. Based on the data we gen-
erated for this dataset, we were able to analyze the properties
of an exhaustively evaluated set of convolutional neural ar-
chitectures at unprecedented scale. In open-sourcing the
NAS-Bench-101 data and generating code, we hope to make
NAS research more accessible and reproducible. We also
hope that NAS-Bench-101 will be the ﬁrst of a continu-
ally improving sequence of rigorous benchmarks for the
emerging NAS ﬁeld.NAS-Bench-101
Acknowledgements
Aaron and Frank gratefully acknowledge support by the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant no. 716721, by BMBF grant DeToL, by the
state of Baden-W ¨urttemberg through bwHPC and the Ger-
man Research Foundation (DFG) through grant no INST
39/963-1 FUGG, and by a Google Faculty Research Award.
Chris, Esteban, Eric, and Kevin would like to thank Quoc
Le, Samy Bengio, Alok Aggarwal, Barret Zoph, Jon Shlens,
Christian Szegedy, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein; and the larger
Google Brain team.
References
Baker, B., Gupta, O., Naik, N., and Raskar, R. Designing
neural network architectures using reinforcement learn-
ing. In ICLR , 2017.
Bergstra, J. and Bengio, Y . Random search for hyper-
parameter optimization. JMLR , 2012.
Bergstra, J. S., Bardenet, R., Bengio, Y ., and K ´egl, B. Algo-
rithms for hyper-parameter optimization. In NIPS , 2011.
Cai, H., Chen, T., Zhang, W., Yu, Y ., and Wang, J. Efﬁcient
architecture search by network transformation. In AAAI ,
2018.
DeVries, T. and Taylor, G. W. Improved regularization of
convolutional neural networks with cutout. arXiv , 2017.
Eggensperger, K., Feurer, M., Hutter, F., Bergstra, J., Snoek,
J., Hoos, H., and Leyton-Brown, K. Towards an empirical
foundation for assessing bayesian optimization of hyper-
parameters. In NIPS workshop on Bayesian Optimization
in Theory and Practice , December 2013.
Elsken, T., Metzen, J. H., and Hutter, F. Multi-
objective architecture search for cnns. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.09081 , 2018.
Elsken, T., Metzen, J. H., and Hutter, F. Neural architecture
search: A survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
20(55):1–21, April 2019.
Falkner, S., Klein, A., and Hutter, F. Bohb: Robust and
efﬁcient hyperparameter optimization at scale. ICML ,
2018.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B.,
Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y .
Generative adversarial nets. In NIPS , 2014.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual
learning for image recognition. In CVPR , 2016.Hu, J., Shen, L., and Sun, G. Squeeze-and-excitation net-
works. CVPR , 2018.
Huang, G., Liu, Z., Weinberger, K. Q., and van der Maaten,
L. Densely connected convolutional networks. In CVPR ,
2017.
Huang, Y ., Cheng, Y ., Chen, D., Lee, H., Ngiam, J., Le,
Q. V ., and Chen, Z. Gpipe: Efﬁcient training of giant
neural networks using pipeline parallelism. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.06965 , 2018.
Hutter, F., Hoos, H. H., and Leyton-Brown, K. Sequential
model-based optimization for general algorithm conﬁg-
uration. In International Conference on Learning and
Intelligent Optimization , 2011.
Jones, T. et al. Evolutionary algorithms, ﬁtness landscapes
and search . PhD thesis, Citeseer, 1995.
Klein, A. and Hutter, F. Tabular benchmarks for joint archi-
tecture and hyperparameter optimization. 2019.
Krizhevsky, A. and Hinton, G. Learning multiple layers
of features from tiny images. Master’s thesis, Dept. of
Computer Science, U. of Toronto , 2009.
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks.
InNIPS , 2012.
Li, L. and Talwalkar, A. Random Search and Reproducibil-
ity for Neural Architecture Search. arXiv e-prints , art.
arXiv:1902.07638, Feb 2019.
Li, L., Jamieson, K., DeSalvo, G., Rostamizadeh, A., and
Talwalkar, A. Hyperband: A novel bandit-based approach
to hyperparameter optimization. JMLR , 2018.
Liu, C., Zoph, B., Shlens, J., Hua, W., Li, L.-J., Fei-Fei, L.,
Yuille, A., Huang, J., and Murphy, K. Progressive neural
architecture search. ECCV , 2018a.
Liu, H., Simonyan, K., and Yang, Y . Darts: Differentiable
architecture search. ICLR , 2018b.
Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient
descent with warm restarts. ICLR , 2017.
Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay reg-
ularization. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2019. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7 .
Pham, H., Guan, M. Y ., Zoph, B., Le, Q. V ., and Dean, J.
Efﬁcient neural architecture search via parameter sharing.
ICML , 2018.NAS-Bench-101
Real, E., Moore, S., Selle, A., Saxena, S., Suematsu, Y . L.,
Le, Q., and Kurakin, A. Large-scale evolution of image
classiﬁers. In ICML , 2017.
Real, E., Aggarwal, A., Huang, Y ., and Le, Q. V . Regu-
larized evolution for image classiﬁer architecture search.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.01548 , 2018.
Sciuto, C., Yu, K., Jaggi, M., Musat, C., and Salzmann, M.
Evaluating the search phase of neural architecture search.
CoRR , abs/1902.08142, 2019. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/1902.08142 .
Shahriari, B., Swersky, K., Wang, Z., Adams, R. P., and
de Freitas, N. Taking the human out of the loop: A review
of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE , 104
(1):148–175, 2016.
Snoek, J., Larochelle, H., and Adams, R. P. Practical
bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms.
InNIPS , 2012.
Snoek, J., Rippel, O., Swersky, K., Kiros, R., Satish, N.,
Sundaram, N., Patwary, M., Prabhat, and Adams, R. Scal-
able Bayesian optimization using deep neural networks.
InProceedings of the 32nd International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML’15) , 2015.
So, D. R., Liang, C., and Le, Q. V . The evolved transformer.
CoRR , abs/1901.11117, 2019.
Springenberg, J. T., Klein, A., Falkner, S., and Hutter, F.
Bayesian optimization with robust bayesian neural net-
works. In Proceedings of the 29th International Con-
ference on Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NIPS’16) , 2016.
Stadler, P. F. Landscapes and their correlation functions.
Journal of Mathematical chemistry , 20(1):1–45, 1996.
Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. V . Sequence to se-
quence learning with neural networks. In NIPS , 2014.
Szegedy, C., Liu, W., Jia, Y ., Sermanet, P., Reed, S.,
Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Vanhoucke, V ., and Rabinovich,
A. Going deeper with convolutions. In CVPR , 2015.
Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V ., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., and Wojna,
Z. Rethinking the inception architecture for computer
vision. In CVPR , 2016.
Tieleman, T. and Hinton, G. Lecture 6.5-rmsprop: Divide
the gradient by a running average of its recent magni-
tude. COURSERA: Neural networks for machine learn-
ing, 2012.
Weinberger, E. Correlated and uncorrelated ﬁtness land-
scapes and how to tell the difference. Biological cyber-
netics , 63(5):325–336, 1990.Williams, R. J. Simple statistical gradient-following algo-
rithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Ma-
chine Learning , 8:229–256, 1992. doi: 10.1007/
BF00992696. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00992696 .
Ying, C. Enumerating unique computational graphs via an
iterative graph invariant. CoRR , abs/1902.06192, 2019.
Zoph, B. and Le, Q. V . Neural architecture search with
reinforcement learning. In ICLR , 2016.
Zoph, B., Vasudevan, V ., Shlens, J., and Le, Q. V . Learning
transferable architectures for scalable image recognition.
InCVPR , 2018.NAS-Bench-101: Towards Reproducible Neural Architecture Search
Supplementary Material
S1. Identifying Isomorphic Cells
Within the NAS-Bench-101 search space of models, there
are models which have different adjacency matrices or have
different labels but are computationally equivalent (e.g., Fig-
ure 1). We call such cells isomorphic . Furthermore, vertices
not on a path from the input vertex to the output vertex do
not contribute to the computation of the cell. Cells with
such vertices can be pruned to smaller cell without changing
the effective behavior of the cell in the network. Due to
the size of the search space, it would be computationally
intractable (and wasteful) to evaluate each possible graph
representation without considering isomorphism.
Figure 1: Two cells which are represented differently ac-
cording to their adjacency matrix and labels but encode the
same computation.
Thus, we utilize an iterative graph hashing algorithm, de-
scribed in (Ying, 2019), which quickly determines whether
two cells are isomorphic. To summarize the algorithm, we
iteratively perform isomorphism-invariant operations on the
vertices of the graph which incorporates information from
both the adjacent vertices as well as the vertex label. The
algorithm outputs a ﬁxed-length hash which uniquely identi-
ﬁes isomorphic cells (i.e., computationally identical graphs
cells to the same value and computationally different cells
hash to different values).
Using such an algorithm allows us to enumerate all unique
cells within the space and choose a single canonical cell to
represent each equivalence class of cells and perform the
expensive train and evaluation procedure on the canonical
cell only. When querying the dataset for a valid model, we
ﬁrst hash the proposed cell then use the hash to return the
data associated with the evaluated canonical graph.batch size 256
initial convolution ﬁlters 128
learning rate schedule cosine decay
initial learning rate 0.2
ending learning rate 0.0
optimizer RMSProp
momentum 0.9
L2 weight decay 0.0001
batch normalization momentum 0.997
batch normalization epsilon 0.00001
accelerator TPU v2 chip
Table 1: Important training hyperparamters.
S2. Implementation Details
S2.1. Generating the dataset
Table 1 shows the training hyperparameters used for all
models in the space. These values were tuned to be optimal
for the average of 50 randomly sampled cells in the search
space. In practice, we ﬁnd that these hyperparameters do
not signiﬁcantly affect the ranking of cells as long as they
are set within reasonable ranges.
S2.2. Benchmarked algorithms
All methods employ the same encoding structure as de-
ﬁned in Section 2.2. For each method except random
search, which is parameterfree, we identiﬁed the method’s
key hyperparameters and found a well-performing set-
ting by a simple grid search which follows the same
experimental protocol as described in the main text.
Scripts to reproduce our experiments can be found at
https://github.com/automl/nas benchmarks.
Random search (RS) We used our own implementation
of random search which samples architectures simply from
a uniform distribution over all possible conﬁgurations in the
conﬁguration space.
Regularized evolution (RE) We used a publicly avail-
able re-implementation for RE (Real et al., 2018). To mu-
tate an architecture, we ﬁrst sample uniformly at random anNAS-Bench-101
edge or an operator. If we sampled an edge we simply ﬂip
it and for operators, we sample a new operator for the set of
all possible operations excluding the current one. RE kills
the oldest member of the population at each iteration after
reaching the population size. We evaluated different values
for the population size (PS) and the tournament size (TS)
(see Figure 4) and set them to PS=100 and TS=10 for the
ﬁnal evaluation.
Tree-structured Parzen estimator (TPE) We used
the Hyperopt implementation from https://github.
com/hyperopt/hyperopt for TPE. All hyperparame-
ters were left to their defaults, since the open-source imple-
mentation does not expose them and, hence, we could not
adapt them for the comparison.
Hyperband For Hyperband we used the publicly avail-
able implementation from https://github.com/
automl/HpBandSter . We setto 3 which is also used
in Li et al. (2018) and Falkner et al. (2018). Note that, chang-
ingwill lead to different budgets, which are not included
in NAS-Bench-101.
BOHB For BOHB we also used the implementation from
https://github.com/automl/HpBandSter .
Figure 3 shows the performance of different values for the
fraction of random conﬁgurations, the number of samples
to optimize the acquisition function, the minimum allowed
bandwidth for the kernel density estimator and the factor
which is multiplied to the bandwidth. Interestingly, while
the minimum bandwidth and the bandwidth-factor do not
seem to have an inﬂuence, the other parameters help to
improve BOHB’s performance, especially at the end of the
optimization, if they are set to quite aggressive values. For
the ﬁnal evaluation we set the random fraction to 0%, the
number of samples to 4, the minimum-bandwidth to 0.3
(default) and the bandwidth factor to 3 (default).
Sequential model-based algorithm conﬁgura-
tion (SMAC) We used the implementation from
https://github.com/automl/SMAC3 for SMAC.
As meta-parameters we exposed the fraction of random
architecture that are evaluated, the maximum number of
function evaluations per architecture and the number of
trees of the random forest (see Figure 2). Since the fraction
of random conﬁgurations does not seem to have an inﬂuence
on the ﬁnal performance of SMAC we kept it as its default
(33%). Interestingly, a smaller number of trees seems to
help and we set it to 5 for the ﬁnal evaluation. Allowing to
evaluate the same conﬁguration multiple times slows SMAC
down in the beginning of the search, hence, we keep it at 1.Reinforcement Learning Figure 5 right shows the effect
of the learning rate for our reinforcement learning agent
described in Section S4. For the ﬁnal evaluation we used a
learning rate of 0.5.
S3. Encoding
Besides the encoding described in Section 4, we also tried
another encoding of the architecture space, which implicitly
contains the constraint of a maximum of 9 edges. Instead of
having a binary vector for all the 21 possible edges in our
graph, we deﬁned for each edge ia numerical parameter in
pi2[0;1]. Additionally, we deﬁned an integer parameter
N20;:::;9. Now, in order to generate an architecture, we
pick theNedges with the highest values. The encoding for
the operators stays the same.
The advantage of this encoding is that by design no archi-
tecture violates the maximum number of edges constraint.
The major disadvantage is that some methods, such as regu-
larized evolution or reinforcement learning, are not easily
applicable without major changes due to the continuous
nature of the search space.
Figure 6 shows the comparison of all the methods that can be
trivially applied to this encoding. We used the same setup
as described in Section 4. Additionally, we also include
Vizier, which is not applicable to the default encoding. All
hyperparameters are the same as described in Section S2.2.
Interestingly the ranking of algorithms changed compared
to the results in Figure 7. TPE achieves a much better per-
formance now than on the default encoding and outperforms
SMAC and BOHB. We assume that, since we used the hy-
perparameters of SMAC and BOHB that were optimized for
the default encoding in Section S2.2, they do not translate
to this new encoding.
S4. REINFORCE Baseline Approach
We attempted to benchmark a reinforcement learning (RL)
approach using a 1-layer LSTM controller trained with PPO,
as proposed by Zoph et al. (2018). With no additional
hyperparameter tuning, the controller seems to fail to learn
to traverse the space and tends to converge quickly to a far-
from-optimal conﬁguration. We suspect that one reason for
this is the highly conditional nature of the space (i.e., cells
with more than 9 edges are ”invalid”). Further tuning may
be required to get RL techniques to work on NAS-Bench-
101, and this constitutes an interesting direction for future
work.
We did, however, successfully train a naive REINFORCE-
based (Williams, 1992) controller which simply outputs a
multinomial probability distribution at each of the 21 pos-
sible edges and 5 operations and samples the distributionNAS-Bench-101
Figure 2: Performance of different meta parameters of SMAC. Left: fraction of random architectures; Middle: maximum
number of function evaluations per architecture; Right: Number of trees in the random forest model.
Figure 3: Performance of different meta parameters of BOHB. Left: fraction of random architectures; Middle Left: number
of samples to optimize the acquisition function; Middle Right: minimum allowed bandwidth of the kernel density estimator;
Right: Factor that is multiplied on the bandwidth for exploration.
Figure 4: Meta parameters of RE. Left: Tournament Size; Right: Population Size.
to get a new model. We believe that this sampling behavior
allows it to ﬁnd more diverse models than the LSTM-PPO
method. The results, when run in the same context as Sec-
tion 4.2, are shown in Figure 8. REINFORCE appears to
perform around as strongly as non-regularized evolution
(NRE) but both NRE and REINFORCE tends to be weaker
than regularized evolution (RE). All methods beat the base-
line random search.
S5. The NAS-HPO-Bench Datasets
The NAS-HPO-Bench datasets consists of 62208 hyperpa-
rameter conﬁgurations of a 2-layer feedforward networks
on four different non-image regression domains, makingthem complementary to NAS-Bench-101. We varied the
number of hidden units, activation types and dropout in each
layer as well as the learning rate, batch size and learning
rate schedule. While the graph space is much smaller than
NAS-Bench-101, it has the important advantage of includ-
ing hyperparameter choices in the search space, allowing us
to measure their interaction and relative importance. For a
full description of these datasets, we refer to Klein & Hutter
(2019).NAS-Bench-101
Figure 5: Right: Learning rate of our reinforcement learning
agent.
Figure 6: Comparison with a different encoding of architec-
tures (see Section S3 for details). The experimental setup
is the same as for Figure 7 in the main text, but note that
the hyperparameters of BOHB and SMAC were determined
based on the main encoding and are not optimal for this
encoding.
S6. Guidelines for Future Benchmarking of
Experiments on NAS-Bench-101
To facilitate a standardized use of NAS-Bench-101 in the
future benchmarking of algorithms, we recommend the fol-
lowing practices:
1.Perform many runs of the various NAS algorithms (in
our experiments, we ran 500).
2.Plot performance as a function of estimated wall clock
time and/or number of function evaluations (as in our
Figure 7, left). This allows judging the performance
of algorithms under different resource constraints. To
allow this, every benchmarked algorithm needs to keep
track of the best architecture found up to each time
step.
3.Do not use test set error during the architecture search
Figure 7: The Spearman rank correlation between accuracy
at different number of epoch pairs (rows) for different per-
centiles of the top architectures (columns) in NAS-Bench-
101. E.g., the accuracies between 36 and 108 epochs across
the top-10% of architectures have a 0.365 correlation.
process. In particular, the choice of the best architec-
ture found up to each time step can only be based on
the training and validation sets. The test error can only
be used for ofﬂine evaluation once the search runs are
complete.
4.To assess robustness of the algorithms with respect
to the seed of the random number generator, plot the
empirical cumulative distribution of the many runs
performed; see our Figure 7 (right) for an example.
5.Compare algorithms using the same hyperparameter
settings for NAS-Bench-101 as for other benchmarks.
Even though tabular benchmarks like NAS-Bench-101
allow for cheap comprehensive evaluations of different
hyperparameter settings (see the next point), in practice
NAS algorithms need to come with a set of defaults
that the authors propose to use for new NAS bench-
marks (or an automated/adaptive method for setting
the hyperparameters online); the performance of these
defaults should be evaluated.
6.Report performance with different hyperparameter set-
tings to produce a quantitative sensitivity analysis (as
in Figures 2-5 of this appendix).
7.If applicable, also study performance for alternative
encodings, such as the continuous encoding discussed
in Appendix S3.NAS-Bench-101
Figure 8: Comparing REINFORCE against regularized evo-
lution (RE), non-regularized evolution (NRE), and a random
search baseline (RS).