Soft Actor-Critic:
Off-Policy Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement Learning with a Stochastic Actor
Tuomas Haarnoja1Aurick Zhou1Pieter Abbeel1Sergey Levine1
Abstract
Model-free deep reinforcement learning (RL) al-
gorithms have been demonstrated on a range of
challenging decision making and control tasks.
However, these methods typically suffer from two
major challenges: very high sample complexity
and brittle convergence properties, which necessi-
tate meticulous hyperparameter tuning. Both of
these challenges severely limit the applicability
of such methods to complex, real-world domains.
In this paper, we propose soft actor-critic, an off-
policy actor-critic deep RL algorithm based on the
maximum entropy reinforcement learning frame-
work. In this framework, the actor aims to maxi-
mize expected reward while also maximizing en-
tropy. That is, to succeed at the task while acting
as randomly as possible. Prior deep RL methods
based on this framework have been formulated
as Q-learning methods. By combining off-policy
updates with a stable stochastic actor-critic formu-
lation, our method achieves state-of-the-art per-
formance on a range of continuous control bench-
mark tasks, outperforming prior on-policy and
off-policy methods. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that, in contrast to other off-policy algorithms, our
approach is very stable, achieving very similar
performance across different random seeds.
1. Introduction
Model-free deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
have been applied in a range of challenging domains, from
games (Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2016) to robotic
control (Schulman et al., 2015). The combination of RL
and high-capacity function approximators such as neural
networks holds the promise of automating a wide range of
decision making and control tasks, but widespread adoption
1Berkeley Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Tuomas Haarnoja
<haarnoja@berkeley.edu >.of these methods in real-world domains has been hampered
by two major challenges. First, model-free deep RL meth-
ods are notoriously expensive in terms of their sample com-
plexity. Even relatively simple tasks can require millions of
steps of data collection, and complex behaviors with high-
dimensional observations might need substantially more.
Second, these methods are often brittle with respect to their
hyperparameters: learning rates, exploration constants, and
other settings must be set carefully for different problem
settings to achieve good results. Both of these challenges
severely limit the applicability of model-free deep RL to
real-world tasks.
One cause for the poor sample efﬁciency of deep RL meth-
ods is on-policy learning: some of the most commonly used
deep RL algorithms, such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015),
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017b) or A3C (Mnih et al., 2016),
require new samples to be collected for each gradient step.
This quickly becomes extravagantly expensive, as the num-
ber of gradient steps and samples per step needed to learn
an effective policy increases with task complexity. Off-
policy algorithms aim to reuse past experience. This is not
directly feasible with conventional policy gradient formula-
tions, but is relatively straightforward for Q-learning based
methods (Mnih et al., 2015). Unfortunately, the combina-
tion of off-policy learning and high-dimensional, nonlinear
function approximation with neural networks presents a ma-
jor challenge for stability and convergence (Bhatnagar et al.,
2009). This challenge is further exacerbated in continuous
state and action spaces, where a separate actor network is
often used to perform the maximization in Q-learning. A
commonly used algorithm in such settings, deep determinis-
tic policy gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015), provides
for sample-efﬁcient learning but is notoriously challenging
to use due to its extreme brittleness and hyperparameter
sensitivity (Duan et al., 2016; Henderson et al., 2017).
We explore how to design an efﬁcient and stable model-
free deep RL algorithm for continuous state and action
spaces. To that end, we draw on the maximum entropy
framework, which augments the standard maximum reward
reinforcement learning objective with an entropy maximiza-
tion term (Ziebart et al., 2008; Toussaint, 2009; Rawlik et al.,arXiv:1801.01290v2  [cs.LG]  8 Aug 2018Soft Actor-Critic
2012; Fox et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2017). Maximum en-
tropy reinforcement learning alters the RL objective, though
the original objective can be recovered using a tempera-
ture parameter (Haarnoja et al., 2017). More importantly,
the maximum entropy formulation provides a substantial
improvement in exploration and robustness: as discussed
by Ziebart (2010), maximum entropy policies are robust
in the face of model and estimation errors, and as demon-
strated by (Haarnoja et al., 2017), they improve exploration
by acquiring diverse behaviors. Prior work has proposed
model-free deep RL algorithms that perform on-policy learn-
ing with entropy maximization (O’Donoghue et al., 2016),
as well as off-policy methods based on soft Q-learning and
its variants (Schulman et al., 2017a; Nachum et al., 2017a;
Haarnoja et al., 2017). However, the on-policy variants suf-
fer from poor sample complexity for the reasons discussed
above, while the off-policy variants require complex approx-
imate inference procedures in continuous action spaces.
In this paper, we demonstrate that we can devise an off-
policy maximum entropy actor-critic algorithm, which we
call soft actor-critic (SAC), which provides for both sample-
efﬁcient learning and stability. This algorithm extends read-
ily to very complex, high-dimensional tasks, such as the
Humanoid benchmark (Duan et al., 2016) with 21 action
dimensions, where off-policy methods such as DDPG typi-
cally struggle to obtain good results (Gu et al., 2016). SAC
also avoids the complexity and potential instability associ-
ated with approximate inference in prior off-policy maxi-
mum entropy algorithms based on soft Q-learning (Haarnoja
et al., 2017). We present a convergence proof for policy
iteration in the maximum entropy framework, and then in-
troduce a new algorithm based on an approximation to this
procedure that can be practically implemented with deep
neural networks, which we call soft actor-critic. We present
empirical results that show that soft actor-critic attains a
substantial improvement in both performance and sample
efﬁciency over both off-policy and on-policy prior methods.
We also compare to twin delayed deep deterministic (TD3)
policy gradient algorithm (Fujimoto et al., 2018), which is
a concurrent work that proposes a deterministic algorithm
that substantially improves on DDPG.
2. Related Work
Our soft actor-critic algorithm incorporates three key in-
gredients: an actor-critic architecture with separate policy
and value function networks, an off-policy formulation that
enables reuse of previously collected data for efﬁciency, and
entropy maximization to enable stability and exploration.
We review prior works that draw on some of these ideas in
this section. Actor-critic algorithms are typically derived
starting from policy iteration, which alternates between pol-
icy evaluation —computing the value function for a policy—andpolicy improvement —using the value function to obtain
a better policy (Barto et al., 1983; Sutton & Barto, 1998). In
large-scale reinforcement learning problems, it is typically
impractical to run either of these steps to convergence, and
instead the value function and policy are optimized jointly.
In this case, the policy is referred to as the actor, and the
value function as the critic. Many actor-critic algorithms
build on the standard, on-policy policy gradient formulation
to update the actor (Peters & Schaal, 2008), and many of
them also consider the entropy of the policy, but instead of
maximizing the entropy, they use it as an regularizer (Schul-
man et al., 2017b; 2015; Mnih et al., 2016; Gruslys et al.,
2017). On-policy training tends to improve stability but
results in poor sample complexity.
There have been efforts to increase the sample efﬁciency
while retaining robustness by incorporating off-policy sam-
ples and by using higher order variance reduction tech-
niques (O’Donoghue et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2016). How-
ever, fully off-policy algorithms still attain better efﬁ-
ciency. A particularly popular off-policy actor-critic method,
DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015), which is a deep variant of the
deterministic policy gradient (Silver et al., 2014) algorithm,
uses a Q-function estimator to enable off-policy learning,
and a deterministic actor that maximizes this Q-function.
As such, this method can be viewed both as a determinis-
tic actor-critic algorithm and an approximate Q-learning
algorithm. Unfortunately, the interplay between the deter-
ministic actor network and the Q-function typically makes
DDPG extremely difﬁcult to stabilize and brittle to hyperpa-
rameter settings (Duan et al., 2016; Henderson et al., 2017).
As a consequence, it is difﬁcult to extend DDPG to complex,
high-dimensional tasks, and on-policy policy gradient meth-
ods still tend to produce the best results in such settings (Gu
et al., 2016). Our method instead combines off-policy actor-
critic training with a stochastic actor, and further aims to
maximize the entropy of this actor with an entropy maxi-
mization objective. We ﬁnd that this actually results in a
considerably more stable and scalable algorithm that, in
practice, exceeds both the efﬁciency and ﬁnal performance
of DDPG. A similar method can be derived as a zero-step
special case of stochastic value gradients (SVG(0)) (Heess
et al., 2015). However, SVG(0) differs from our method in
that it optimizes the standard maximum expected return ob-
jective, and it does not make use of a separate value network,
which we found to make training more stable.
Maximum entropy reinforcement learning optimizes poli-
cies to maximize both the expected return and the ex-
pected entropy of the policy. This framework has been
used in many contexts, from inverse reinforcement learn-
ing (Ziebart et al., 2008) to optimal control (Todorov, 2008;
Toussaint, 2009; Rawlik et al., 2012). In guided policy
search (Levine & Koltun, 2013; Levine et al., 2016), the
maximum entropy distribution is used to guide policy learn-Soft Actor-Critic
ing towards high-reward regions. More recently, several
papers have noted the connection between Q-learning and
policy gradient methods in the framework of maximum en-
tropy learning (O’Donoghue et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al.,
2017; Nachum et al., 2017a; Schulman et al., 2017a). While
most of the prior model-free works assume a discrete action
space, Nachum et al. (2017b) approximate the maximum en-
tropy distribution with a Gaussian and Haarnoja et al. (2017)
with a sampling network trained to draw samples from the
optimal policy. Although the soft Q-learning algorithm pro-
posed by Haarnoja et al. (2017) has a value function and
actor network, it is not a true actor-critic algorithm: the
Q-function is estimating the optimal Q-function, and the
actor does not directly affect the Q-function except through
the data distribution. Hence, Haarnoja et al. (2017) moti-
vates the actor network as an approximate sampler, rather
than the actor in an actor-critic algorithm. Crucially, the
convergence of this method hinges on how well this sampler
approximates the true posterior. In contrast, we prove that
our method converges to the optimal policy from a given
policy class, regardless of the policy parameterization. Fur-
thermore, these prior maximum entropy methods generally
do not exceed the performance of state-of-the-art off-policy
algorithms, such as DDPG, when learning from scratch,
though they may have other beneﬁts, such as improved ex-
ploration and ease of ﬁne-tuning. In our experiments, we
demonstrate that our soft actor-critic algorithm does in fact
exceed the performance of prior state-of-the-art off-policy
deep RL methods by a wide margin.
3. Preliminaries
We ﬁrst introduce notation and summarize the standard and
maximum entropy reinforcement learning frameworks.
3.1. Notation
We address policy learning in continuous action spaces.
We consider an inﬁnite-horizon Markov decision process
(MDP), deﬁned by the tuple (S;A;p;r), where the state
spaceSand the action space Aare continuous, and the
unknown state transition probability p:SSA!
[0;1)represents the probability density of the next state
st+12Sgiven the current state st2Sand action at2A.
The environment emits a bounded reward r:SA!
[rmin;rmax]on each transition. We will use (st)and
(st;at)to denote the state and state-action marginals of
the trajectory distribution induced by a policy (atjst).
3.2. Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning
Standard RL maximizes the expected sum of rewardsP
tE(st;at)[r(st;at)]. We will consider a more gen-
eral maximum entropy objective (see e.g. Ziebart (2010)),
which favors stochastic policies by augmenting the objectivewith the expected entropy of the policy over (st):
J() =TX
t=0E(st;at)[r(st;at) +
H((jst))]:(1)
The temperature parameter 
determines the relative im-
portance of the entropy term against the reward, and thus
controls the stochasticity of the optimal policy. The maxi-
mum entropy objective differs from the standard maximum
expected reward objective used in conventional reinforce-
ment learning, though the conventional objective can be
recovered in the limit as 
!0. For the rest of this paper,
we will omit writing the temperature explicitly, as it can
always be subsumed into the reward by scaling it by 
 1.
This objective has a number of conceptual and practical
advantages. First, the policy is incentivized to explore more
widely, while giving up on clearly unpromising avenues.
Second, the policy can capture multiple modes of near-
optimal behavior. In problem settings where multiple ac-
tions seem equally attractive, the policy will commit equal
probability mass to those actions. Lastly, prior work has ob-
served improved exploration with this objective (Haarnoja
et al., 2017; Schulman et al., 2017a), and in our experi-
ments, we observe that it considerably improves learning
speed over state-of-art methods that optimize the conven-
tional RL objective function. We can extend the objective to
inﬁnite horizon problems by introducing a discount factor 
to ensure that the sum of expected rewards and entropies is
ﬁnite. Writing down the maximum entropy objective for the
inﬁnite horizon discounted case is more involved (Thomas,
2014) and is deferred to Appendix A.
Prior methods have proposed directly solving for the op-
timal Q-function, from which the optimal policy can be
recovered (Ziebart et al., 2008; Fox et al., 2016; Haarnoja
et al., 2017). We will discuss how we can devise a soft
actor-critic algorithm through a policy iteration formulation,
where we instead evaluate the Q-function of the current
policy and update the policy through an off-policy gradient
update. Though such algorithms have previously been pro-
posed for conventional reinforcement learning, our method
is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst off-policy actor-critic method
in the maximum entropy reinforcement learning framework.
4. From Soft Policy Iteration to Soft
Actor-Critic
Our off-policy soft actor-critic algorithm can be derived
starting from a maximum entropy variant of the policy it-
eration method. We will ﬁrst present this derivation, verify
that the corresponding algorithm converges to the optimal
policy from its density class, and then present a practical
deep reinforcement learning algorithm based on this theory.Soft Actor-Critic
4.1. Derivation of Soft Policy Iteration
We will begin by deriving soft policy iteration, a general al-
gorithm for learning optimal maximum entropy policies that
alternates between policy evaluation and policy improve-
ment in the maximum entropy framework. Our derivation
is based on a tabular setting, to enable theoretical analysis
and convergence guarantees, and we extend this method
into the general continuous setting in the next section. We
will show that soft policy iteration converges to the optimal
policy within a set of policies which might correspond, for
instance, to a set of parameterized densities.
In the policy evaluation step of soft policy iteration, we
wish to compute the value of a policy according to the
maximum entropy objective in Equation 1. For a ﬁxed
policy, the soft Q-value can be computed iteratively, starting
from any function Q:SA! Rand repeatedly applying
a modiﬁed Bellman backup operator Tgiven by
TQ(st;at),r(st;at) +
Est+1p[V(st+1)];(2)
where
V(st) =Eat[Q(st;at) log(atjst)] (3)
is the soft state value function. We can obtain the soft value
function for any policy by repeatedly applying Tas
formalized below.
Lemma 1 (Soft Policy Evaluation) .Consider the soft Bell-
man backup operator Tin Equation 2 and a mapping
Q0:SA! RwithjAj<1, and deﬁneQk+1=TQk.
Then the sequence Qkwill converge to the soft Q-value of
ask!1 .
Proof. See Appendix B.1.
In the policy improvement step, we update the policy to-
wards the exponential of the new Q-function. This particular
choice of update can be guaranteed to result in an improved
policy in terms of its soft value. Since in practice we prefer
policies that are tractable, we will additionally restrict the
policy to some set of policies , which can correspond, for
example, to a parameterized family of distributions such as
Gaussians. To account for the constraint that 2, we
project the improved policy into the desired set of policies.
While in principle we could choose any projection, it will
turn out to be convenient to use the information projection
deﬁned in terms of the Kullback-Leibler divergence. In the
other words, in the policy improvement step, for each state,
we update the policy according to
new= arg min
02DKL
0(jst)



exp (Qold(st;))
Zold(st)
:
(4)The partition function Zold(st)normalizes the distribution,
and while it is intractable in general, it does not contribute to
the gradient with respect to the new policy and can thus be
ignored, as noted in the next section. For this projection, we
can show that the new, projected policy has a higher value
than the old policy with respect to the objective in Equa-
tion 1. We formalize this result in Lemma 2.
Lemma 2 (Soft Policy Improvement) .Letold2and let
newbe the optimizer of the minimization problem deﬁned
in Equation 4. Then Qnew(st;at)Qold(st;at)for all
(st;at)2SA withjAj<1.
Proof. See Appendix B.2.
The full soft policy iteration algorithm alternates between
the soft policy evaluation and the soft policy improvement
steps, and it will provably converge to the optimal maxi-
mum entropy policy among the policies in (Theorem 1).
Although this algorithm will provably ﬁnd the optimal solu-
tion, we can perform it in its exact form only in the tabular
case. Therefore, we will next approximate the algorithm for
continuous domains, where we need to rely on a function
approximator to represent the Q-values, and running the
two steps until convergence would be computationally too
expensive. The approximation gives rise to a new practical
algorithm, called soft actor-critic.
Theorem 1 (Soft Policy Iteration) .Repeated application of
soft policy evaluation and soft policy improvement from any
2converges to a policy such thatQ(st;at)
Q(st;at)for all2and(st;at)2SA , assuming
jAj<1.
Proof. See Appendix B.3.
4.2. Soft Actor-Critic
As discussed above, large continuous domains require us to
derive a practical approximation to soft policy iteration. To
that end, we will use function approximators for both the
Q-function and the policy, and instead of running evaluation
and improvement to convergence, alternate between opti-
mizing both networks with stochastic gradient descent. We
will consider a parameterized state value function V (st),
soft Q-function Q(st;at), and a tractable policy (atjst).
The parameters of these networks are  ;  , and. For
example, the value functions can be modeled as expressive
neural networks, and the policy as a Gaussian with mean
and covariance given by neural networks. We will next
derive update rules for these parameter vectors.
The state value function approximates the soft value. There
is no need in principle to include a separate function approx-
imator for the state value, since it is related to the Q-function
and policy according to Equation 3. This quantity can beSoft Actor-Critic
estimated from a single action sample from the current pol-
icy without introducing a bias, but in practice, including a
separate function approximator for the soft value can stabi-
lize training and is convenient to train simultaneously with
the other networks. The soft value function is trained to
minimize the squared residual error
JV( ) =EstDh
1
2 
V (st) Eat[Q(st;at) log(atjst)]2i
(5)
whereDis the distribution of previously sampled states and
actions, or a replay buffer. The gradient of Equation 5 can
be estimated with an unbiased estimator
^r JV( ) =r V (st) (V (st) Q(st;at) + log(atjst));
(6)
where the actions are sampled according to the current pol-
icy, instead of the replay buffer. The soft Q-function param-
eters can be trained to minimize the soft Bellman residual
JQ() =E(st;at)D1
2
Q(st;at) ^Q(st;at)2
;
(7)
with
^Q(st;at) =r(st;at) +
Est+1p
V (st+1)
; (8)
which again can be optimized with stochastic gradients
^rJQ() =rQ(at;st) 
Q(st;at) r(st;at) 
V (st+1):
(9)
The update makes use of a target value network V , where
 can be an exponentially moving average of the value
network weights, which has been shown to stabilize train-
ing (Mnih et al., 2015). Alternatively, we can update the
target weights to match the current value function weights
periodically (see Appendix E). Finally, the policy param-
eters can be learned by directly minimizing the expected
KL-divergence in Equation 4:
J() =EstD
DKL
(jst)



exp (Q(st;))
Z(st)
:
(10)
There are several options for minimizing J. A typical
solution for policy gradient methods is to use the likelihood
ratio gradient estimator (Williams, 1992), which does not
require backpropagating the gradient through the policy and
the target density networks. However, in our case, the target
density is the Q-function, which is represented by a neural
network an can be differentiated, and it is thus convenient
to apply the reparameterization trick instead, resulting in a
lower variance estimator. To that end, we reparameterize
the policy using a neural network transformation
at=f(t;st); (11)Algorithm 1 Soft Actor-Critic
Initialize parameter vectors  , ,,.
foreach iteration do
foreach environment step do
at(atjst)
st+1p(st+1jst;at)
D D[f (st;at;r(st;at);st+1)g
end for
foreach gradient step do
    V^r JV( )
i i Q^riJQ(i)fori2f1;2g
  ^rJ()
   + (1 ) 
end for
end for
wheretis an input noise vector, sampled from some ﬁxed
distribution, such as a spherical Gaussian. We can now
rewrite the objective in Equation 10 as
J() =EstD;tN[log(f(t;st)jst) Q(st;f(t;st))];
(12)
whereis deﬁned implicitly in terms of f, and we have
noted that the partition function is independent of and can
thus be omitted. We can approximate the gradient of Equa-
tion 12 with
^rJ() =rlog(atjst)
+ (ratlog(atjst) r atQ(st;at))rf(t;st);
(13)
where atis evaluated at f(t;st). This unbiased gradient
estimator extends the DDPG style policy gradients (Lillicrap
et al., 2015) to any tractable stochastic policy.
Our algorithm also makes use of two Q-functions to mitigate
positive bias in the policy improvement step that is known
to degrade performance of value based methods (Hasselt,
2010; Fujimoto et al., 2018). In particular, we parameterize
two Q-functions, with parameters i, and train them inde-
pendently to optimize JQ(i). We then use the minimum of
the Q-functions for the value gradient in Equation 6 and pol-
icy gradient in Equation 13, as proposed by Fujimoto et al.
(2018). Although our algorithm can learn challenging tasks,
including a 21-dimensional Humanoid, using just a single
Q-function, we found two Q-functions signiﬁcantly speed
up training, especially on harder tasks. The complete algo-
rithm is described in Algorithm 1. The method alternates
between collecting experience from the environment with
the current policy and updating the function approximators
using the stochastic gradients from batches sampled from a
replay buffer. In practice, we take a single environment step
followed by one or several gradient steps (see Appendix DSoft Actor-Critic
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
million steps01000200030004000average returnHopper-v1
(a) Hopper-v1
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
million steps0100020003000400050006000average returnWalker2d-v1 (b) Walker2d-v1
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
million steps050001000015000 average returnHalfCheetah-v1 (c) HalfCheetah-v1
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
million steps0200040006000average returnAnt-v1
(d) Ant-v1
0 2 4 6 8 10
million steps02000400060008000average returnHumanoid-v1 (e) Humanoid-v1
0 2 4 6 8 10
million steps0200040006000average returnHumanoid (rllab)
SAC
DDPG
PPO
SQL
TD3 (concurrent) (f) Humanoid (rllab)
Figure 1. Training curves on continuous control benchmarks. Soft actor-critic (yellow) performs consistently across all tasks and
outperforming both on-policy and off-policy methods in the most challenging tasks.
for all hyperparameter). Using off-policy data from a replay
buffer is feasible because both value estimators and the pol-
icy can be trained entirely on off-policy data. The algorithm
is agnostic to the parameterization of the policy, as long as
it can be evaluated for any arbitrary state-action tuple.
5. Experiments
The goal of our experimental evaluation is to understand
how the sample complexity and stability of our method
compares with prior off-policy and on-policy deep rein-
forcement learning algorithms. We compare our method
to prior techniques on a range of challenging continuous
control tasks from the OpenAI gym benchmark suite (Brock-
man et al., 2016) and also on the rllab implementation of
the Humanoid task (Duan et al., 2016). Although the easier
tasks can be solved by a wide range of different algorithms,
the more complex benchmarks, such as the 21-dimensional
Humanoid (rllab), are exceptionally difﬁcult to solve with
off-policy algorithms (Duan et al., 2016). The stability of
the algorithm also plays a large role in performance: eas-
ier tasks make it more practical to tune hyperparameters
to achieve good results, while the already narrow basins of
effective hyperparameters become prohibitively small for
the more sensitive algorithms on the hardest benchmarks,
leading to poor performance (Gu et al., 2016).We compare our method to deep deterministic policy gra-
dient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2015), an algorithm that
is regarded as one of the more efﬁcient off-policy deep
RL methods (Duan et al., 2016); proximal policy optimiza-
tion (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017b), a stable and effective
on-policy policy gradient algorithm; and soft Q-learning
(SQL) (Haarnoja et al., 2017), a recent off-policy algorithm
for learning maximum entropy policies. Our SQL imple-
mentation also includes two Q-functions, which we found
to improve its performance in most environments. We addi-
tionally compare to twin delayed deep deterministic policy
gradient algorithm (TD3) (Fujimoto et al., 2018), using
the author-provided implementation. This is an extension
to DDPG, proposed concurrently to our method, that ﬁrst
applied the double Q-learning trick to continuous control
along with other improvements. We have included trust re-
gion path consistency learning (Trust-PCL) (Nachum et al.,
2017b) and two other variants of SAC in Appendix E. We
turned off the exploration noise for evaluation for DDPG
and PPO. For maximum entropy algorithms, which do not
explicitly inject exploration noise, we either evaluated with
the exploration noise (SQL) or use the mean action (SAC).
The source code of our SAC implementation1and videos2
are available online.
1github.com/haarnoja/sac
2sites.google.com/view/soft-actor-criticSoft Actor-Critic
5.1. Comparative Evaluation
Figure 1 shows the total average return of evaluation rollouts
during training for DDPG, PPO, and TD3. We train ﬁve
different instances of each algorithm with different random
seeds, with each performing one evaluation rollout every
1000 environment steps. The solid curves corresponds to the
mean and the shaded region to the minimum and maximum
returns over the ﬁve trials.
The results show that, overall, SAC performs comparably
to the baseline methods on the easier tasks and outperforms
them on the harder tasks with a large margin, both in terms
of learning speed and the ﬁnal performance. For example,
DDPG fails to make any progress on Ant-v1, Humanoid-
v1, and Humanoid (rllab), a result that is corroborated by
prior work (Gu et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016). SAC also
learns considerably faster than PPO as a consequence of
the large batch sizes PPO needs to learn stably on more
high-dimensional and complex tasks. Another maximum
entropy RL algorithm, SQL, can also learn all tasks, but it
is slower than SAC and has worse asymptotic performance.
The quantitative results attained by SAC in our experiments
also compare very favorably to results reported by other
methods in prior work (Duan et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2016;
Henderson et al., 2017), indicating that both the sample
efﬁciency and ﬁnal performance of SAC on these benchmark
tasks exceeds the state of the art. All hyperparameters used
in this experiment for SAC are listed in Appendix D.
5.2. Ablation Study
The results in the previous section suggest that algorithms
based on the maximum entropy principle can outperform
conventional RL methods on challenging tasks such as the
humanoid tasks. In this section, we further examine which
particular components of SAC are important for good perfor-
mance. We also examine how sensitive SAC is to some of
the most important hyperparameters, namely reward scaling
and target value update smoothing constant.
Stochastic vs. deterministic policy. Soft actor-critic
learns stochastic policies via a maximum entropy objec-
tive. The entropy appears in both the policy and value
function. In the policy, it prevents premature convergence of
the policy variance (Equation 10). In the value function, it
encourages exploration by increasing the value of regions of
state space that lead to high-entropy behavior (Equation 5).
To compare how the stochasticity of the policy and entropy
maximization affects the performance, we compare to a
deterministic variant of SAC that does not maximize the en-
tropy and that closely resembles DDPG, with the exception
of having two Q-functions, using hard target updates, not
having a separate target actor, and using ﬁxed rather than
learned exploration noise. Figure 2 compares ﬁve individual
runs with both variants, initialized with different random
0 2 4 6 8 10
million steps0200040006000average returnHumanoid (rllab)
stochastic policy
deterministic policyFigure 2. Comparison of SAC (blue) and a deterministic variant of
SAC (red) in terms of the stability of individual random seeds on
the Humanoid (rllab) benchmark. The comparison indicates that
stochasticity can stabilize training as the variability between the
seeds becomes much higher with a deterministic policy.
seeds. Soft actor-critic performs much more consistently,
while the deterministic variant exhibits very high variability
across seeds, indicating substantially worse stability. As
evident from the ﬁgure, learning a stochastic policy with
entropy maximization can drastically stabilize training. This
becomes especially important with harder tasks, where tun-
ing hyperparameters is challenging. In this comparison, we
updated the target value network weights with hard updates,
by periodically overwriting the target network parameters
to match the current value network (see Appendix E for
a comparison of average performance on all benchmark
tasks).
Policy evaluation. Since SAC converges to stochastic
policies, it is often beneﬁcial to make the ﬁnal policy deter-
ministic at the end for best performance. For evaluation, we
approximate the maximum a posteriori action by choosing
the mean of the policy distribution. Figure 3(a) compares
training returns to evaluation returns obtained with this strat-
egy indicating that deterministic evaluation can yield better
performance. It should be noted that all of the training
curves depict the sum of rewards, which is different from
the objective optimized by SAC and other maximum en-
tropy RL algorithms, including SQL and Trust-PCL, which
maximize also the entropy of the policy.
Reward scale. Soft actor-critic is particularly sensitive to
the scaling of the reward signal, because it serves the role
of the temperature of the energy-based optimal policy and
thus controls its stochasticity. Larger reward magnitudes
correspond to lower entries. Figure 3(b) shows how learn-
ing performance changes when the reward scale is varied:
For small reward magnitudes, the policy becomes nearly
uniform, and consequently fails to exploit the reward signal,
resulting in substantial degradation of performance. For
large reward magnitudes, the model learns quickly at ﬁrst,Soft Actor-Critic
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
million steps0200040006000average returnAnt-v1
deterministic evaluation
stochastic evaluation
(a) Evaluation
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
million steps0200040006000average returnAnt-v1
1
3
10
30
100 (b) Reward Scale
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
million steps−20000200040006000average returnAnt-v1
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1 (c) Target Smoothing Coefﬁcient ( )
Figure 3. Sensitivity of soft actor-critic to selected hyperparameters on Ant-v1 task. (a) Evaluating the policy using the mean action
generally results in a higher return. Note that the policy is trained to maximize also the entropy, and the mean action does not, in general,
correspond the optimal action for the maximum return objective. (b) Soft actor-critic is sensitive to reward scaling since it is related to the
temperature of the optimal policy. The optimal reward scale varies between environments, and should be tuned for each task separately.
(c) Target value smoothing coefﬁcient is used to stabilize training. Fast moving target (large ) can result in instabilities (red), whereas
slow moving target (small ) makes training slower (blue).
but the policy then becomes nearly deterministic, leading
to poor local minima due to lack of adequate exploration.
With the right reward scaling, the model balances explo-
ration and exploitation, leading to faster learning and better
asymptotic performance. In practice, we found reward scale
to be the only hyperparameter that requires tuning, and its
natural interpretation as the inverse of the temperature in
the maximum entropy framework provides good intuition
for how to adjust this parameter.
Target network update. It is common to use a separate
target value network that slowly tracks the actual value func-
tion to improve stability. We use an exponentially moving
average, with a smoothing constant , to update the target
value network weights as common in the prior work (Lill-
icrap et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2015). A value of one cor-
responds to a hard update where the weights are copied
directly at every iteration and zero to not updating the target
at all. In Figure 3(c), we compare the performance of SAC
whenvaries. Large can lead to instabilities while small
can make training slower. However, we found the range
of suitable values of to be relatively wide and we used
the same value (0.005) across all of the tasks. In Figure 4
(Appendix E) we also compare to another variant of SAC,
where instead of using exponentially moving average, we
copy over the current network weights directly into the tar-
get network every 1000 gradient steps. We found this variant
to beneﬁt from taking more than one gradient step between
the environment steps, which can improve performance but
also increases the computational cost.6. Conclusion
We present soft actor-critic (SAC), an off-policy maximum
entropy deep reinforcement learning algorithm that provides
sample-efﬁcient learning while retaining the beneﬁts of en-
tropy maximization and stability. Our theoretical results
derive soft policy iteration, which we show to converge to
the optimal policy. From this result, we can formulate a
soft actor-critic algorithm, and we empirically show that it
outperforms state-of-the-art model-free deep RL methods,
including the off-policy DDPG algorithm and the on-policy
PPO algorithm. In fact, the sample efﬁciency of this ap-
proach actually exceeds that of DDPG by a substantial mar-
gin. Our results suggest that stochastic, entropy maximizing
reinforcement learning algorithms can provide a promising
avenue for improved robustness and stability, and further
exploration of maximum entropy methods, including meth-
ods that incorporate second order information (e.g., trust
regions (Schulman et al., 2015)) or more expressive policy
classes is an exciting avenue for future work.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Vitchyr Pong for insightful discus-
sions and help in implementing our algorithm as well as
providing the DDPG baseline code; Oﬁr Nachum for offer-
ing support in running Trust-PCL experiments; and George
Tucker for his valuable feedback on an early version of this
paper. This work was supported by Siemens and Berkeley
DeepDrive.Soft Actor-Critic
References
Barto, A. G., Sutton, R. S., and Anderson, C. W. Neuronlike
adaptive elements that can solve difﬁcult learning con-
trol problems. IEEE transactions on systems, man, and
cybernetics , pp. 834–846, 1983.
Bhatnagar, S., Precup, D., Silver, D., Sutton, R. S., Maei,
H. R., and Szepesv ´ari, C. Convergent temporal-difference
learning with arbitrary smooth function approximation.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS) , pp. 1204–1212, 2009.
Brockman, G., Cheung, V ., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J.,
Schulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W. OpenAI gym.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540 , 2016.
Duan, Y ., Chen, X. Houthooft, R., Schulman, J., and Abbeel,
P. Benchmarking deep reinforcement learning for contin-
uous control. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML) , 2016.
Fox, R., Pakman, A., and Tishby, N. Taming the noise in
reinforcement learning via soft updates. In Conference
on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI) , 2016.
Fujimoto, S., van Hoof, H., and Meger, D. Addressing func-
tion approximation error in actor-critic methods. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.09477 , 2018.
Gruslys, A., Azar, M. G., Bellemare, M. G., and Munos, R.
The reactor: A sample-efﬁcient actor-critic architecture.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04651 , 2017.
Gu, S., Lillicrap, T., Ghahramani, Z., Turner, R. E., and
Levine, S. Q-prop: Sample-efﬁcient policy gradient with
an off-policy critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02247 ,
2016.
Haarnoja, T., Tang, H., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Rein-
forcement learning with deep energy-based policies. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,
pp. 1352–1361, 2017.
Hasselt, H. V . Double Q-learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , pp. 2613–2621,
2010.
Heess, N., Wayne, G., Silver, D., Lillicrap, T., Erez, T., and
Tassa, Y . Learning continuous control policies by stochas-
tic value gradients. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS) , pp. 2944–2952, 2015.
Henderson, P., Islam, R., Bachman, P., Pineau, J., Precup,
D., and Meger, D. Deep reinforcement learning that
matters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06560 , 2017.
Kingma, D. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. In International Conference for Learning
Presentations (ICLR) , 2015.Levine, S. and Koltun, V . Guided policy search. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pp. 1–9,
2013.
Levine, S., Finn, C., Darrell, T., and Abbeel, P. End-to-end
training of deep visuomotor policies. Journal of Machine
Learning Research , 17(39):1–40, 2016.
Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez,
T., Tassa, Y ., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous
control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.02971 , 2015.
Mnih, V ., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A.,
Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D., and Riedmiller, M. Playing
atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.5602 , 2013.
Mnih, V ., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness,
J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidje-
land, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 518(7540):
529–533, 2015.
Mnih, V ., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap,
T. P., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asyn-
chronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,
2016.
Nachum, O., Norouzi, M., Xu, K., and Schuurmans, D.
Bridging the gap between value and policy based rein-
forcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS) , pp. 2772–2782, 2017a.
Nachum, O., Norouzi, M., Xu, K., and Schuurmans, D.
Trust-PCL: An off-policy trust region method for contin-
uous control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01891 , 2017b.
O’Donoghue, B., Munos, R., Kavukcuoglu, K., and Mnih, V .
PGQ: Combining policy gradient and Q-learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.01626 , 2016.
Peters, J. and Schaal, S. Reinforcement learning of motor
skills with policy gradients. Neural networks , 21(4):682–
697, 2008.
Rawlik, K., Toussaint, M., and Vijayakumar, S. On stochas-
tic optimal control and reinforcement learning by approx-
imate inference. Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) ,
2012.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M. I., and
Moritz, P. Trust region policy optimization. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pp.
1889–1897, 2015.Soft Actor-Critic
Schulman, J., Abbeel, P., and Chen, X. Equivalence be-
tween policy gradients and soft Q-learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.06440 , 2017a.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017b.
Silver, D., Lever, G., Heess, N., Degris, T., Wierstra, D.,
and Riedmiller, M. Deterministic policy gradient algo-
rithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML) , 2014.
Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L.,
van den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I.,
Panneershelvam, V ., Lanctot, M., Dieleman, S., Grewe,
D., Nham, J., Kalchbrenner, N., Sutskever, I., Lillicrap, T.,
Leach, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., Graepel, T., and Hassabis,
D. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks
and tree search. Nature , 529(7587):484–489, Jan 2016.
ISSN 0028-0836. Article.
Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An
introduction , volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998.
Thomas, P. Bias in natural actor-critic algorithms. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pp.
441–448, 2014.
Todorov, E. General duality between optimal control and
estimation. In IEEE Conference on Decision and Control
(CDC) , pp. 4286–4292. IEEE, 2008.
Toussaint, M. Robot trajectory optimization using approxi-
mate inference. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML) , pp. 1049–1056. ACM, 2009.
Williams, R. J. Simple statistical gradient-following algo-
rithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine
learning , 8(3-4):229–256, 1992.
Ziebart, B. D. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with
the principle of maximum causal entropy . Carnegie Mel-
lon University, 2010.
Ziebart, B. D., Maas, A. L., Bagnell, J. A., and Dey, A. K.
Maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning. In
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) , pp.
1433–1438, 2008.Soft Actor-Critic
A. Maximum Entropy Objective
The exact deﬁnition of the discounted maximum entropy objective is complicated by the fact that, when using a discount
factor for policy gradient methods, we typically do not discount the state distribution, only the rewards. In that sense,
discounted policy gradients typically do not optimize the true discounted objective. Instead, they optimize average reward,
with the discount serving to reduce variance, as discussed by Thomas (2014). However, we can deﬁne the objective that is
optimized under a discount factor as
J() =1X
t=0E(st;at)"1X
l=t
l tEslp;al[r(st;at) +
H((jst))jst;at]#
: (14)
This objective corresponds to maximizing the discounted expected reward and entropy for future states originating from
every state-action tuple (st;at)weighted by its probability under the current policy.
B. Proofs
B.1. Lemma 1
Lemma 1 (Soft Policy Evaluation). Consider the soft Bellman backup operator Tin Equation 2 and a mapping
Q0:SA! RwithjAj<1, and deﬁne Qk+1=TQk. Then the sequence Qkwill converge to the soft Q-value of 
ask!1 .
Proof. Deﬁne the entropy augmented reward as r(st;at),r(st;at) +Est+1p[H((jst+1))]and rewrite the update
rule as
Q(st;at) r(st;at) +
Est+1p;at+1[Q(st+1;at+1)] (15)
and apply the standard convergence results for policy evaluation (Sutton & Barto, 1998). The assumption jAj<1is
required to guarantee that the entropy augmented reward is bounded.
B.2. Lemma 2
Lemma 2 (Soft Policy Improvement). Letold2and letnewbe the optimizer of the minimization problem deﬁned in
Equation 4. Then Qnew(st;at)Qold(st;at)for all (st;at)2SA withjAj<1.
Proof. Letold2and letQoldandVoldbe the corresponding soft state-action value and soft state value, and let new
be deﬁned as
new(jst) = arg min
02DKL(0(jst)kexp (Qold(st;) logZold(st)))
= arg min
02Jold(0(jst)): (16)
It must be the case that Jold(new(jst))Jold(old(jst)), since we can always choose new=old2. Hence
Eatnew[lognew(atjst) Qold(st;at) + logZold(st)]Eatold[logold(atjst) Qold(st;at) + logZold(st)];
(17)
and since partition function Zolddepends only on the state, the inequality reduces to
Eatnew[Qold(st;at) lognew(atjst)]Vold(st): (18)
Next, consider the soft Bellman equation:
Qold(st;at) =r(st;at) +
Est+1p[Vold(st+1)]
r(st;at) +
Est+1p
Eat+1new[Qold(st+1;at+1) lognew(at+1jst+1)]
...
Qnew(st;at); (19)
where we have repeatedly expanded Qoldon the RHS by applying the soft Bellman equation and the bound in Equation 18.
Convergence to Qnewfollows from Lemma 1.Soft Actor-Critic
B.3. Theorem 1
Theorem 1 (Soft Policy Iteration). Repeated application of soft policy evaluation and soft policy improvement to any 2
converges to a policy such thatQ(st;at)Q(st;at)for all2and(st;at)2SA , assumingjAj<1.
Proof. Letibe the policy at iteration i. By Lemma 2, the sequence Qiis monotonically increasing. Since Qis bounded
above for2(both the reward and entropy are bounded), the sequence converges to some . We will still need to
show thatis indeed optimal. At convergence, it must be case that J((jst))<J((jst))for all2,6=.
Using the same iterative argument as in the proof of Lemma 2, we get Q(st;at)>Q(st;at)for all (st;at)2SA ,
that is, the soft value of any other policy in is lower than that of the converged policy. Hence is optimal in .
C. Enforcing Action Bounds
We use an unbounded Gaussian as the action distribution. However, in practice, the actions needs to be bounded to a ﬁnite
interval. To that end, we apply an invertible squashing function ( tanh ) to the Gaussian samples, and employ the change of
variables formula to compute the likelihoods of the bounded actions. In the other words, let u2RDbe a random variable
and(ujs)the corresponding density with inﬁnite support. Then a= tanh( u), where tanh is applied elementwise, is a
random variable with support in ( 1;1)with a density given by
(ajs) =(ujs)detda
du 1
: (20)
Since the Jacobian da=du= diag(1 tanh2(u))is diagonal, the log-likelihood has a simple form
log(ajs) = log(ujs) DX
i=1log 
1 tanh2(ui)
; (21)
whereuiis theithelement of u.Soft Actor-Critic
D. Hyperparameters
Table 1 lists the common SAC parameters used in the comparative evaluation in Figure 1 and Figure 4. Table 2 lists the
reward scale parameter that was tuned for each environment.
Table 1. SAC Hyperparameters
Parameter Value
Shared
optimizer Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015)
learning rate 310 4
discount (
) 0.99
replay buffer size 106
number of hidden layers (all networks) 2
number of hidden units per layer 256
number of samples per minibatch 256
nonlinearity ReLU
SAC
target smoothing coefﬁcient ( ) 0.005
target update interval 1
gradient steps 1
SAC (hard target update)
target smoothing coefﬁcient ( ) 1
target update interval 1000
gradient steps (except humanoids) 4
gradient steps (humanoids) 1
Table 2. SAC Environment Speciﬁc Parameters
Environment Action Dimensions Reward Scale
Hopper-v1 3 5
Walker2d-v1 6 5
HalfCheetah-v1 6 5
Ant-v1 8 5
Humanoid-v1 17 20
Humanoid (rllab) 21 10Soft Actor-Critic
E. Additional Baseline Results
Figure 4 compares SAC to Trust-PCL (Figure 4. Trust-PC fails to solve most of the task within the given number of
environment steps, although it can eventually solve the easier tasks (Nachum et al., 2017b) if ran longer. The ﬁgure also
includes two variants of SAC: a variant that periodically copies the target value network weights directly instead of using
exponentially moving average, and a deterministic ablation which assumes a deterministic policy in the value update
(Equation 6) and the policy update (Equation 13), and thus strongly resembles DDPG with the exception of having two
Q-functions, using hard target updates, not having a separate target actor, and using ﬁxed exploration noise rather than
learned. Both of these methods can learn all of the tasks and they perform comparably to SAC on all but Humanoid (rllab)
task, on which SAC is the fastest.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
million steps01000200030004000average returnHopper-v1
(a) Hopper-v1
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
million steps0100020003000400050006000average returnWalker2d-v1 (b) Walker2d-v1
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
million steps050001000015000 average returnHalfCheetah-v1 (c) HalfCheetah-v1
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
million steps0200040006000average returnAnt-v1
(d) Ant-v1
0 2 4 6 8 10
million steps02000400060008000average returnHumanoid-v1 (e) Humanoid-v1
0 2 4 6 8 10
million steps0200040006000average returnHumanoid (rllab)
SAC
SAC (hard target update)
SAC (hard target update, deterministic)
Trust-PCL (f) Humanoid (rllab)
Figure 4. Training curves for additional baseline (Trust-PCL) and for two SAC variants. Soft actor-critic with hard target update (blue)
differs from standard SAC in that it copies the value function network weights directly every 1000 iterations, instead of using exponentially
smoothed average of the weights. The deterministic ablation (red) uses a deterministic policy with ﬁxed Gaussian exploration noise,
does not use a value function, drops the entropy terms in the actor and critic function updates, and uses hard target updates for the target
Q-functions. It is equivalent to DDPG that uses two Q-functions, hard target updates, and removes the target actor.