Disentangling by Factorising

Hyunjik Kim1 2Andriy Mnih1
Abstract
We deﬁne and address the problem of unsuper-
vised learning of disentangled representations on
data generated from independent factors of varia-
tion. We propose FactorV AE, a method that dis-
entangles by encouraging the distribution of rep-
resentations to be factorial and hence independent
across the dimensions. We show that it improves
upon-V AE by providing a better trade-off be-
tween disentanglement and reconstruction quality.
Moreover, we highlight the problems of a com-
monly used disentanglement metric and introduce
a new metric that does not suffer from them.
1. Introduction
Learning interpretable representations of data that expose
semantic meaning has important consequences for artiﬁcial
intelligence. Such representations are useful not only for
standard downstream tasks such as supervised learning and
reinforcement learning, but also for tasks such as transfer
learning and zero-shot learning where humans excel but
machines struggle (Lake et al., 2016). There have been
multiple efforts in the deep learning community towards
learning factors of variation in the data, commonly referred
to as learning a disentangled representation . While there is
no canonical deﬁnition for this term, we adopt the one due
to Bengio et al. (2013): a representation where a change
in one dimension corresponds to a change in one factor
of variation, while being relatively invariant to changes in
other factors. In particular, we assume that the data has
been generated from a ﬁxed number of independent factors
of variation.3We focus on image data, where the effect of
factors of variation is easy to visualise.
Using generative models has shown great promise in learn-
ing disentangled representations in images. Notably, semi-
1DeepMind, UK2Department of Statistics, University
of Oxford. Correspondence to: Hyunjik Kim <hyun-
jikk@google.com >.
Proceedings of the 35thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018
by the author(s).
3We discuss the limitations of this assumption in Section 4.
Cross-entropy loss
for classifying samples
from each class
 - encouraging        to 
   be factorised
randomly permute 
each dimension
across batchVAE
-
+Discriminator
Input
FactorVAE objective  = VAE objective  -       cross-entropy los sFigure 1. Architecture of FactorV AE, a Variational Autoencoder
(V AE) that encourages the code distribution to be factorial. The
top row is a V AE with convolutional encoder and decoder, and
the bottom row is an MLP classiﬁer, the discriminator, that dis-
tinguishes whether the input was drawn from the marginal code
distribution or the product of its marginals.
supervised approaches that require implicit or explicit
knowledge about the true underlying factors of the data have
excelled at disentangling (Kulkarni et al., 2015; Kingma
et al., 2014; Reed et al., 2014; Siddharth et al., 2017; Hinton
et al., 2011; Mathieu et al., 2016; Goroshin et al., 2015; Hsu
et al., 2017; Denton & Birodkar, 2017). However, ideally
we would like to learn these in an unsupervised manner, due
to the following reasons: 1. Humans are able to learn factors
of variation unsupervised (Perry et al., 2010). 2. Labels are
costly as obtaining them requires a human in the loop. 3.
Labels assigned by humans might be inconsistent or leave
out the factors that are difﬁcult for humans to identify.
-V AE (Higgins et al., 2016) is a popular method for un-
supervised disentangling based on the Variational Autoen-
coder (V AE) framework (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014) for generative modelling. It uses a modiﬁed ver-
sion of the V AE objective with a larger weight (  >1) on
the KL divergence between the variational posterior and the
prior, and has proven to be an effective and stable method
for disentangling. One drawback of -V AE is that recon-
struction quality (compared to V AE) must be sacriﬁced
in order to obtain better disentangling. The goal of our
work is to obtain a better trade-off between disentanglement
and reconstruction, allowing to achieve better disentangle-
ment without degrading reconstruction quality. In this work,
we analyse the source of this trade-off and propose Factor-
V AE, which augments the V AE objective with a penalty thatDisentangling by Factorising
encourages the marginal distribution of representations to
be factorial without substantially affecting the quality of
reconstructions. This penalty is expressed as a KL diver-
gence between this marginal distribution and the product
of its marginals, and is optimised using a discriminator net-
work following the divergence minimisation view of GANs
(Nowozin et al., 2016; Mohamed & Lakshminarayanan,
2016). Our experimental results show that this approach
achieves better disentanglement than -V AE for the same
reconstruction quality. We also point out the weaknesses
in the disentangling metric of Higgins et al. (2016), and
propose a new metric that addresses these shortcomings.
A popular alternative to -V AE is InfoGAN (Chen et al.,
2016), which is based on the Generative Adversarial Net
(GAN) framework (Goodfellow et al., 2014) for generative
modelling. InfoGAN learns disentangled representations by
rewarding the mutual information between the observations
and a subset of latents. However at least in part due to its
training stability issues (Higgins et al., 2016), there has been
little empirical comparison between V AE-based methods
and InfoGAN. Taking advantage of the recent developments
in the GAN literature that help stabilise training, we include
InfoWGAN-GP, a version of InfoGAN that uses Wasser-
stein distance (Arjovsky et al., 2017) and gradient penalty
(Gulrajani et al., 2017), in our experimental evaluation.
In summary, we make the following contributions: 1) We
introduce FactorV AE, a method for disentangling that gives
higher disentanglement scores than -V AE for the same
reconstruction quality. 2) We identify the weaknesses of
the disentanglement metric of Higgins et al. (2016) and
propose a more robust alternative. 3) We give quantitative
comparisons of FactorV AE and -V AE against InfoGAN’s
WGAN-GP counterpart for disentanglement.
2. Trade-off between Disentanglement and
Reconstruction in -VAE
We motivate our approach by analysing where the disen-
tanglement and reconstruction trade-off arises in the -
V AE objective. First, we introduce notation and archi-
tecture of our V AE framework. We assume that observa-
tionsx(i)2X;i= 1;:::;N are generated by combining
Kunderlying factors f= (f1;:::;fK). These observa-
tions are modelled using a real-valued latent/code vector
z2Rd, interpreted as the representation of the data. The
generative model is deﬁned by the standard Gaussian prior
p(z) =N(0;I), intentionally chosen to be a factorised
distribution, and the decoder p(xjz)parameterised by a
neural net. The variational posterior for an observation is
q(zjx) =Qd
j=1N(zjjj(x);2
j(x)), with the mean and
variance produced by the encoder, also parameterised bya neural net.1The variational posterior can be seen as the
distribution of the representation corresponding to the data
pointx. The distribution of representations for the entire
data set is then given by
q(z) =Epdata(x)[q(zjx)] =1
NNX
i=1q(zjx(i));(1)
which is known as the marginal posterior or aggregate pos-
terior, where pdata is the empirical data distribution. A
disentangled representation would have each zjcorrespond
to precisely one underlying factor fk. Since we assume that
these factors vary independently, we wish for a factorial
distributionq(z) =Qd
j=1q(zj).
The-V AE objective
1
NNX
i=1h
Eq(zjx(i))[logp(x(i)jz)] KL (q(zjx(i))jjp(z))i
is a variational lower bound on Epdata(x)[logp(x(i))]for
1, reducing to the V AE objective for = 1. Its ﬁrst
term can be interpreted as the negative reconstruction error ,
and the second term as the complexity penalty that acts as
a regulariser. We may further break down this KL term as
(Hoffman & Johnson, 2016; Makhzani & Frey, 2017)
Epdata(x)[KL(q(zjx)jjp(z))] =I(x;z)+KL(q(z)jjp(z));
whereI(x;z)is the mutual information between xandzun-
der the joint distribution pdata(x)q(zjx). See Appendix C
for the derivation. Penalising the KL(q(z)jjp(z))term
pushesq(z)towards the factorial prior p(z), encouraging
independence in the dimensions of zand thus disentangling.
PenalisingI(x;z), on the other hand, reduces the amount of
information about xstored inz, which can lead to poor re-
constructions for high values of (Makhzani & Frey, 2017).
Thus making larger than 1, penalising both terms more,
leads to better disentanglement but reduces reconstruction
quality. When this reduction is severe, there is insufﬁcient
information about the observation in the latents, making it
impossible to recover the true factors. Therefore there exists
a value of > 1that gives highest disentanglement, but
results in a higher reconstruction error than a V AE.
3. Total Correlation Penalty and FactorVAE
PenalisingI(x;z)more than a V AE does might be neither
necessary nor desirable for disentangling. For example,
InfoGAN disentangles by encouraging I(x;c)to be high
wherecis a subset of the latent variables z2. Hence we
1In the rest of the paper we will omit the dependence of pand
qon their parameters for notational convenience.
2Note however that I(x;z)in-V AE is deﬁned under the joint
distribution of data and their encoding distribution pdata(x)q(zjx),
whereasI(x;c)in InfoGAN is deﬁned on the joint distribution of
the prior oncand the decoding distribution p(c)p(xjc).Disentangling by Factorising
motivate FactorV AE by augmenting the V AE objective with
a term that directly encourages independence in the code
distribution, arriving at the following objective:
1
NNX
i=1h
Eq(zjx(i))[logp(x(i)jz)] KL(q(zjx(i))jjp(z))i
 
KL (q(z)jjq(z));(2)
where q(z):=Qd
j=1q(zj). Note that this is also a lower
bound on the marginal log likelihood Epdata(x)[logp(x)].
KL(q(z)jjq(z))is known as Total Correlation (TC, Watan-
abe, 1960), a popular measure of dependence for multiple
random variables. In our case this term is intractable since
bothq(z)andq(z)involve mixtures with a large number of
components, and the direct Monte Carlo estimate requires a
pass through the entire data set for each q(z)evaluation.3.
Hence we take an alternative approach for optimizing this
term. We start by observing we can sample from q(z)efﬁ-
ciently by ﬁrst choosing a datapoint x(i)uniformly at ran-
dom and then sampling from q(zjx(i)). We can also sample
from q(z)by generating dsamples from q(z)and then ig-
noring all but one dimension for each sample. A more
efﬁcient alternative involves sampling a batch from q(z)
and then randomly permuting across the batch for each la-
tent dimension (see Alg. 1). This is a standard trick used in
the independence testing literature (Arcones & Gine, 1992)
and as long as the batch is large enough, the distribution of
these samples samples will closely approximate q(z).
Having access to samples from both distributions allows
us to minimise their KL divergence using the density-ratio
trick (Nguyen et al., 2010; Sugiyama et al., 2012) which
involves training a classiﬁer/discriminator to approximate
the density ratio that arises in the KL term. Suppose we
have a discriminator D(in our case an MLP) that outputs
an estimate of the probability D(z)that its input is a sample
fromq(z)rather than from q(z). Then we have
TC(z) =KL(q(z)jjq(z)) =Eq(z)
logq(z)
q(z)
Eq(z)
logD(z)
1 D(z)
: (3)
We train the discriminator and the V AE jointly. In particu-
lar, the V AE parameters are updated using the objective in
Eqn. (2), with the TC term replaced using the discriminator-
based approximation from Eqn. (3). The discriminator is
trained to classify between samples from q(z)andq(z),
thus learning to approximate the density ratio needed for
estimating TC. See Alg. 2 for pseudocode of FactorV AE.
It is important to note that low TC is necessary but not
sufﬁcient for meaningful disentangling. For example, when
3We have also tried using a batch estimate of q(z), but this did
not work. See Appendix D for details.Algorithm 1 permute dims
Input:fz(i)2Rd:i= 1;:::;Bg
forj= 1toddo
 random permutation on f1;:::;Bg
(z(i)
j)B
i=1 (z((i))
j )B
i=1
end for
Output:fz(i):i= 1;:::;Bg
Algorithm 2 FactorV AE
Input: observations (x(i))N
i=1, batch size m, latent di-
mensiond,
, V AE/Discriminator optimisers: g,gD
Initialize V AE and discriminator parameters ; .
repeat
Randomly select batch (x(i))i2Bof sizem
Samplez(i)
q(zjx(i))8i2B
 g(r1
mP
i2B[logp(x(i);z(i)
)
q(z(i)
jx(i)) 
logD (z(i)
)
1 D (z(i)
)])
Randomly select batch (x(i))i2B0of sizem
Samplez0(i)
q(zjx(i))fori2B0
(z0(i)
perm)i2B0 permute dims ((z0(i)
)i2B0)
  gD(r 1
2m[P
i2Blog(D (z(i)
))
+P
i2B0log(1 D (z0(i)
perm))])
until convergence of objective.
q(zjx) =p(z), TC=0 butzcarries no information about the
data. Thus having low TC is only meaningful when we can
preserve information in the latents, which is why controlling
for reconstruction error is important.
In the GAN literature, divergence minimisation is usually
done between two distributions over the data space, which
is often very high dimensional (e.g. images). As a result, the
two distributions often have disjoint support, making train-
ing unstable, especially when the discriminator is strong.
Hence it is necessary to use tricks to weaken the discrim-
inator such as instance noise (Sønderby et al., 2016) or to
replace the discriminator with a critic, as in Wasserstein
GANs (Arjovsky et al., 2017). In this work, we minimise
divergence between two distributions over the latent space
(as in e.g. (Mescheder et al., 2017)), which is typically much
lower dimensional and the two distributions have overlap-
ping support. We observe that training is stable for sufﬁ-
ciently large batch sizes (e.g. 64 worked well for d= 10 ),
allowing us to use a strong discriminator.
4. A New Metric for Disentanglement
The deﬁnition of disentanglement we use in this paper,
where a change in one dimension of the representation cor-
responds to a change in exactly one factor of variation, isDisentangling by Factorising
Generate data with
fixed    , randomGet
representationT ake absolute
value of difference
T ake meanOne training point for
linear classifier
Generate data with
fixed    , randomGet rescaled
representation
T ake empirical variance
in each dimensionT ake argminOne training point for
majority-vote classifierFix one factor
Fix one factor
Figure 2. Top: Metric in (Higgins et al., 2016). Bottom: Our new
metric, where s2Rdis the scale (empirical standard deviation)
of latent representations of the full data (or large enough random
subset).
clearly a simplistic one. It does not allow correlations among
the factors or hierarchies over them. Thus this deﬁnition
seems more suited to synthetic data with independent fac-
tors of variation than to most realistic data sets. However,
as we will show below, robust disentanglement is not a fully
solved problem even in this simple setting. One obstacle
on the way to this ﬁrst milestone is the absence of a sound
quantitative metric for measuring disentanglement.
A popular method of measuring disentanglement is by in-
specting latent traversals : visualising the change in recon-
structions while traversing one dimension of the latent space
at a time. Although latent traversals can be a useful indicator
of when a model has failed to disentangle, the qualitative
nature of this approach makes it unsuitable for comparing
algorithms reliably. Doing this would require inspecting
a multitude of latent traversals over multiple reference im-
ages, random seeds, and points during training. Having a
human in the loop to assess the traversals is also too time-
consuming and subjective. Unfortunately, for data sets that
do not have the ground truth factors of variation available,
currently this is the only viable option for assessing disen-
tanglement.
Higgins et al. (2016) proposed a supervised metric that at-
tempts to quantify disentanglement when the ground truth
factors of a data set are given. The metric is the error rate
of a linear classiﬁer that is trained as follows. Choose a
factork; generate data with this factor ﬁxed but all other
factors varying randomly; obtain their representations (de-
ﬁned to be the mean of q(zjx)); take the absolute value of
the pairwise differences of these representations. Then the
mean of these statistics across the pairs gives one training
input for the classiﬁer, and the ﬁxed factor index kis the
corresponding training output (see top of Figure 2). So if the
representations were perfectly disentangled, we would see
zeros in the dimension of the training input that corresponds
to the ﬁxed factor of variation, and the classiﬁer would learn
to map the index of the zero value to the index of the factor.
However this metric has several weaknesses. Firstly, it
could be sensitive to hyperparameters of the linear classiﬁer
optimisation, such as the choice of the optimiser and its
orig reconstrFigure 3. A-V AE model trained on the 2D Shapes data that
scores 100% on metric in Higgins et al. (2016) (ignoring the shape
factor). First row: originals. Second row: reconstructions. Re-
maining rows: reconstructions of latent traversals. The model only
uses three latent units to capture x-position,y-position, scale and
ignores orientation, yet achieves a perfect score on the metric.
hyperparameters, weight initialisation, and the number of
training iterations. Secondly, having a linear classiﬁer is
not so intuitive – we could get representations where each
factor corresponds to a linear combination of dimensions
instead of a single dimension. Finally and most importantly,
the metric has a failure mode: it gives 100% accuracy even
when onlyK 1factors out of Khave been disentangled;
to predict the remaining factor, the classiﬁer simply learns
to detect when all the values corresponding to the K 1
factors are non-zero. An example of such a case is shown in
Figure 3.
To address these weaknesses, we propose a new disentan-
glement metric as follows. Choose a factor k; generate data
with this factor ﬁxed but all other factors varying randomly;
obtain their representations; normalise each dimension by
its empirical standard deviation over the full data (or a large
enough random subset); take the empirical variance in each
dimension4of these normalised representations. Then the
index of the dimension with the lowest variance and the
target indexkprovide one training input/output example for
the classiﬁer (see bottom of Figure 2). Thus if the repre-
sentation is perfectly disentangled, the empirical variance
in the dimension corresponding to the ﬁxed factor will be
0. We normalise the representations so that the arg min
is invariant to rescaling of the representations in each di-
mension. Since both inputs and outputs lie in a discrete
space, the optimal classiﬁer is the majority-vote classiﬁer
(see Appendix B for details), and the metric is the error rate
of the classiﬁer. The resulting classiﬁer is a deterministic
function of the training data, hence there are no optimisation
hyperparameters to tune. We also believe that this metric
is conceptually simpler and more natural than the previous
one. Most importantly, it circumvents the failure mode of
the earlier metric, since the classiﬁer needs to see the lowest
variance in a latent dimension for a given factor to classify
it correctly.
We think developing a reliable unsupervised disentangling
metric that does not use the ground truth factors is an im-
portant direction for future research, since unsupervised
4We can use Gini’s deﬁnition of variance for discrete latents
(Gini, 1971). See Appendix B for details.Disentangling by Factorising
disentangling is precisely useful for the scenario where we
do not have access to the ground truth factors. With this in
mind, we believe that having a reliable supervised metric is
still valuable as it can serve as a gold standard for evaluating
unsupervised metrics.
5. Related Work
There are several recent works that use a discriminator to
optimise a divergence to encourage independence in the
latent codes. Adversarial Autoencoder (AAE, Makhzani
et al., 2015) removes the I(x;z)term in the V AE objec-
tive and maximizes the negative reconstruction error minus
KL(q(z)jjp(z))via the density-ratio trick, showing appli-
cations in semi-supervised classiﬁcation and unsupervised
clustering. This means that the AAE objective is not a lower
bound on the log marginal likelihood. Although optimising
a lower bound is not strictly necessary for disentangling, it
does ensure that we have a valid generative model; having
a generative model with disentangled latents has the ben-
eﬁt of being a single model that can be useful for various
tasks e.g. planning for model-based RL, visual concept
learning and semi-supervised learning, to name a few. In
PixelGAN Autoencoders (Makhzani & Frey, 2017), the
same objective is used to study the decomposition of in-
formation between the latent code and the decoder. The
authors state that adding noise to the inputs of the encoder
is crucial, which suggests that limiting the information that
the code contains about the input is essential and that the
I(x;z)term should not be dropped from the V AE objective.
Brakel & Bengio (2017) also use a discriminator to penalise
the Jensen-Shannon Divergence between the distribution of
codes and the product of its marginals. However, they use
the GAN loss with deterministic encoders and decoders and
only explore their technique in the context of Independent
Component Analysis source separation.
Early works on unsupervised disentangling include (Schmid-
huber, 1992) which attempts to disentangle codes in an au-
toencoder by penalising predictability of one latent dimen-
sion given the others and (Desjardins et al., 2012) where a
variant of a Boltzmann Machine is used to disentangle two
factors of variation in the data. More recently, Achille &
Soatto (2018) have used a loss function that penalises TC
in the context of supervised learning. They show that their
approach can be extended to the V AE setting, but do not
perform any experiments on disentangling to support the the-
ory. In a concurrent work, Kumar et al. (2018) used moment
matching in V AEs to penalise the covariance between the
latent dimensions, but did not constrain the mean or higher
moments. We provide the objectives used in these related
methods and show experimental results on disentangling
performance, including AAE, in Appendix F.
There have been various works that use the notion of pre-dictability to quantify disentanglement, mostly predicting
the value of ground truth factors f= (f1;:::;fK)from
the latent code z. This dates back to Yang & Amari (1997)
who learn a linear map from representations to factors in the
context of linear ICA, and quantify how close this map is to
a permutation matrix. More recently Eastwood & Williams
(2018) have extended this idea to disentanglement by train-
ing a Lasso regressor to map ztofand using its trained
weights to quantify disentanglement. Like other regression-
based approaches, this one introduces hyperparameters such
as the optimiser and the Lasso penalty coefﬁcient. The met-
ric of Higgins et al. (2016) as well as the one we proposed,
predict the factor kfrom thezof images with a ﬁxed fk
butf kvarying randomly. Schmidhuber (1992) quantiﬁes
predictability between the different dimensions of z, using
a predictor that is trained to predict zjfromz j.
Invariance andequivariance are frequently considered to
be desirable properties of representations in the literature
(Goodfellow et al., 2009; Kivinen & Williams, 2011; Lenc
& Vedaldi, 2015). A representation is said to be invariant
for a particular task if it does not change when nuisance fac-
tors of the data, that are irrelevant to the task, are changed.
Anequivariant representation changes in a stable and pre-
dictable manner when altering a factor of variation. A dis-
entangled representation, in the sense used in the paper,
is equivariant, since changing one factor of variation will
change one dimension of a disentangled representation in a
predictable manner. Given a task, it will be easy to obtain
an invariant representation from the disentangled represen-
tation by ignoring the dimensions encoding the nuisance
factors for the task (Cohen & Welling, 2014).
Building on a preliminary version of this paper, (Chen et al.,
2018) recently proposed a minibatch-based alternative to
our density-ratio-trick-based method for estimating the Total
Correlation and introduced an information-theoretic disen-
tangling metric.
6. Experiments
We compare FactorV AE to -V AE on the following data sets
with i) known generative factors: 1) 2D Shapes (Matthey
et al., 2017): 737,280 binary 6464images of 2D shapes
with ground truth factors[number of values]: shape[3],
scale[6], orientation[40], x-position[32], y-position[32]. 2)
3D Shapes data: 480,000 RGB 64643images of 3D
shapes with ground truth factors: shape[4], scale[8], orienta-
tion[15], ﬂoor colour[10], wall colour[10], object colour[10]
ii) unknown generative factors: 3) 3D Faces (Paysan et al.,
2009): 239,840 grey-scale 6464images of 3D Faces. 4)
3D Chairs (Aubry et al., 2014): 86,366 RGB 64643
images of chair CAD models. 5) CelebA (cropped ver-
sion) (Liu et al., 2015): 202,599 RGB 64643images
of celebrity faces. The experimental details such as en-Disentangling by Factorising
coder/decoder architectures and hyperparameter settings are
in Appendix A. The details of the disentanglement met-
rics, along with a sensitivity analysis with respect to their
hyperparameters, are given in Appendix B.
reconstruction error new disentanglement metric old disentanglement metric
iteration iteration 
Figure 4. Reconstruction error (top), metric in Higgins et al. (2016)
(middle), our metric (bottom). -V AE (left), FactorV AE (right).
The colours correspond to different values of and
respectively,
and conﬁdence intervals are over 10 random seeds.
Better
Figure 5. Reconstruction error plotted against our disentanglement
metric, both averaged over 10 random seeds at the end of training.
The numbers at each point are values of and
. Note that we
want low reconstruction error and a high disentanglement metric.
-VAE FactorVAEorig reconstr
Figure 6. First row: originals. Second row: reconstructions. Re-
maining rows: reconstructions of latent traversals across each
latent dimension sorted by KL(q(zjjx)jjp(zj)), for the best scor-
ing models on our disentanglement metric. Left: -V AE, score:
0.814,= 4. Right: FactorV AE, score: 0.889, 
= 35 .
From Figure 4, we see that FactorV AE gives much better
True TC
Discriminator TC estimate
iteration iterationFigure 7. Total Correlation values for FactorV AE on 2D Shapes.
Left: True TC value. Right: Discriminator’s estimate of TC.
disentanglement scores than V AEs ( = 1), while barely
sacriﬁcing reconstruction error, highlighting the disentan-
gling effect of adding the Total Correlation penalty to the
V AE objective. The best disentanglement scores for Factor-
V AE are noticeably better than those for -V AE given the
same reconstruction error. This can be seen more clearly
in Figure 5 where the best mean disentanglement of Fac-
torV AE (
= 40 ) is around 0.82, signiﬁcantly higher than
the one for -V AE (= 4), which is around 0.73, both
with reconstruction error around 45. From Figure 6, we
can see that both models are capable of ﬁnding x-position,
y-position, and scale, but struggle to disentangle orienta-
tion and shape, -V AE especially. For this data set, neither
method can robustly capture shape, the discrete factor of
variation5.
As a sanity check, we also evaluated the correlation between
our metric and the metric in Higgins et al. (2016): Pearson
(linear correlation coefﬁcient): 0.404, Kendall (proportion
of pairs that have the same ordering): 0.310, Spearman
(linear correlation of the rankings): 0.444, all with p-value
0.000. Hence the two metrics show a fairly high positive
correlation as expected.
We have also examined how the discriminator’s estimate of
the Total Correlation (TC) behaves and the effect of 
on
the true TC. From Figure 7, observe that the discriminator
is consistently underestimating the true TC, also conﬁrmed
in (Rosca et al., 2018). However the true TC decreases
throughout training, and a higher 
leads to lower TC, so
the gradients obtained using the discriminator are sufﬁcient
for encouraging independence in the code distribution.
We then evaluated InfoWGAN-GP, the counterpart of Info-
GAN that uses Wasserstein distance and gradient penalty.
See Appendix G for an overview. One advantage of Info-
GAN is that the Monte Carlo estimate of its objective is
differentiable with respect to its parameters even for dis-
crete codes c, which makes gradient-based optimisation
straightforward. In contrast, V AE-based methods that rely
on the reprameterisation trick for gradient-based optimisa-
tion requirezto be a reparameterisable continuous random
variable and alternative approaches require various vari-
5This is partly due to the fact that learning discrete factors
would require using discrete latent variables instead of Gaussians,
but jointly modelling discrete and continuous factors of variation
is a non-trivial problem that needs further research.Disentangling by Factorising
ance reduction techniques for gradient estimation (Mnih
& Rezende, 2016; Maddison et al., 2017). Thus we might
expect Info(W)GAN(-GP) to show better disentangling in
cases where some factors are discrete. Hence we use 4
continuous latents (one for each continuous factor) and one
categorical latent of 3 categories (one for each shape). We
tuned for, the weight of the mutual information term
in Info(W)GAN(-GP), 2f0:0;0:1;0:2;:::; 1:0g, number
of noise variables2f5;10;20;40;80;160gand the learn-
ing rates of the generator 2f10 3;10 4g, discriminator
2f10 4;10 5g.
old disentanglement metric
new disentanglement metric
iteration iteration
Figure 8. Disentanglement scores for InfoWGAN-GP on 2D
Shapes for 10 random seeds per hyperparameter setting. Left:
Metric in Higgins et al. (2016). Right: Our metric.
Figure 9. Latent traversals for InfoWGAN-GP on 2D Shapes
across four continuous codes (ﬁrst four rows) and categorical code
(last row) for run with best disentanglement score ( = 0:2).
However from Figure 8 we can see that the disentanglement
scores are disappointingly low. From the latent traversals
in Figure 9, we can see that the model learns only the scale
factor, and tries to put positional information in the discrete
latent code, which is one reason for the low disentanglement
score. Using 5 continuous codes and no categorical codes
did not improve the disentanglement scores however. Info-
GAN with early stopping (before training instability occurs
– see Appendix H) also gave similar results. The fact that
some latent traversals give blank reconstructions indicates
that the model does not generalise well to all parts of the
domain ofp(z).
One reason InfoWGAN-GP’s poor performance on this data
set could be that InfoGAN is sensitive to the generator and
discriminator architecture, which is one thing we did not
tune extensively. We use a similar architecture to the V AE-
based approaches for 2D shapes for a fair comparison, but
have also tried a bigger architecture which gave similar
results (see Appendix H). If architecture search is indeed
important, this would be a weakness of InfoGAN relative to
Better
Figure 10. Same as Figure 5 for 3D Shapes data.
reconstr orig
wall 
colour
floor
colour
object
colour
orient-
ation
size
shape
Figure 11. Same as Figure 6 but for 3D Shapes data. Left: -V AE,
score: 1.00,= 32 . Right: FactorV AE, score: 1.00, 
= 7.
FactorV AE and -V AE, which are both much more robust
to architecture choice. In Appendix H, we check that we
can replicate the results of Chen et al. (2016) on MNIST
using InfoWGAN-GP, verify that it makes training stable
compared to InfoGAN, and give implementation details with
further empirical studies of InfoGAN and InfoWGAN-GP.
We now show results on the 3D Shapes data, which is a more
complex data set of 3D scenes with additional features such
as shadows and background (sky). We train both -V AE
and FactorV AE for 1M iterations. Figure 10 again shows
that FactorV AE achieves much better disentanglement with
barely any increase in reconstruction error compared to V AE.
Moreover, while the top mean disentanglement scores for
FactorV AE and -V AE are similar, the reconstruction error
is lower for FactorV AE: 3515 ( 
= 36 ) as compared to 3570
(= 24 ). The latent traversals in Figure 11 show that both
models are able to capture the factors of variation in the
best-case scenario. Looking at latent traversals across many
random seeds, however, makes it evident that both models
struggled to disentangle the factors for shape and scale.
To show that FactorV AE also gives a valid generative model
for both 2D Shapes and 3D Shapes, we present the log
marginal likelihood evaluated on the entire data set together
with samples from the generative model in Appendix E.
We also show results for -V AE and FactorV AE experiments
on the data sets with unknown generative factors, namely
3D Chairs, 3D Faces, and CelebA. Note that inspecting la-
tent traversals is the only evaluation method possible here.
We can see from Figure 12 (and Figures 38 and 39 in Ap-
pendix I) that FactorV AE has smaller reconstruction error
compared to -V AE, and is capable of learning sensibleDisentangling by Factorising
factors of variation, as shown in the latent traversals in Fig-
ures 13, 14 and 15. Unfortunately, as explained in Section 4,
latent traversals tell us little about the robustness of our
method.
reconstruction erroriteration iteration
Figure 12. Plots of reconstruction error of -V AE (left) and Fac-
torV AE (right) for different values of and
on 3D Faces data
over 5 random seeds.
size
azimuth
back length
leg style-VAE
size
azimuth
back lengthFactorVAE
Figure 13.-V AE and FactorV AE latent traversals across each
latent dimension sorted by KL on 3D Chairs, with annotations of
the factor of variation corresponding to each latent unit.
azimuth
elevation
azimuth
lighting-VAE
FactorVAE
azimuth
elevation
lighting
Figure 14. Same as Figure 13 but for 3D Faces.
background brightness
azimuth
skin tone
hair length
background blueness
fringe
head shapeFactorVAE-VAE
background brightness
hair colour
azimuthhair colour
skin tone
hair lengthFigure 15. Same as Figure 13 but for CelebA.
7. Conclusion and Discussion
We have introduced FactorV AE, a novel method for disen-
tangling that achieves better disentanglement scores than
-V AE on the 2D Shapes and 3D Shapes data sets for the
same reconstruction quality. Moreover, we have identiﬁed
weaknesses of the commonly used disentanglement metric
of Higgins et al. (2016), and proposed an alternative metric
that is conceptually simpler, is free of hyperparameters, and
avoids the failure mode of the former. Finally, we have
performed an experimental evaluation of disentangling for
the V AE-based methods and InfoWGAN-GP, a more stable
variant of InfoGAN, and identiﬁed its weaknesses relative
to the V AE-based methods.
One of the limitations of our approach is that low Total
Correlation is necessary but not sufﬁcient for disentangling
of independent factors of variation. For example, if all
but one of the latent dimensions were to collapse to the
prior, the TC would be 0 but the representation would not
be disentangled. Our disentanglement metric also requires
us to be able to generate samples holding one factor ﬁxed,
which may not always be possible, for example when our
training set does not cover all possible combinations of
factors. The metric is also unsuitable for data with non-
independent factors of variation.
For future work, we would like to use discrete latent vari-
ables to model discrete factors of variation and investigate
how to reliably capture combinations of discrete and contin-
uous factors using discrete and continuous latents.Disentangling by Factorising
Acknowledgements
We thank Chris Burgess and Nick Watters for providing the
data sets and helping to set them up, and thank Guillaume
Desjardins, Sergey Bartunov, Mihaela Rosca, Irina Higgins
and Yee Whye Teh for helpful discussions.
References
Achille, A. and Soatto, S. Information Dropout: Learn-
ing optimal representations through noisy computation.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
telligence , 2018.
Arcones, M. A. and Gine, E. On the bootstrap of U and V
statistics. The Annals of Statistics , pp. 655–674, 1992.
Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., and Bottou, L. Wasserstein
Generative Adversarial Networks. In ICML , 2017.
Aubry, M., Maturana, D., Efros, A. A., Russell, B. C., and
Sivic, J. Seeing 3D chairs: exemplar part-based 2D-3D
alignment using a large dataset of cad models. In CVPR ,
2014.
Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. Layer normalization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 , 2016.
Bengio, Y ., Courville, A., and Vincent, P. Representation
learning: A review and new perspectives. IEEE transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 35
(8):1798–1828, 2013.
Brakel, P. and Bengio, Y . Learning independent features
with adversarial nets for non-linear ICA. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.05050 , 2017.
Chen, T. Q., Li, X., Grosse, R., and Duvenaud, D. Isolating
sources of disentanglement in variational autoencoders.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04942 , 2018.
Chen, X., Duan, Y ., Houthooft, R., Schulman, J., Sutskever,
I., and Abbeel, P. InfoGAN: Interpretable representation
learning by information maximizing Generative Adver-
sarial Nets. In NIPS , 2016.
Cohen, T. and Welling, M. Learning the irreducible repre-
sentations of commutative lie groups. In ICML , 2014.
Denton, E. L. and Birodkar, V . Unsupervised learning of
disentangled representations from video. In NIPS , 2017.
Desjardins, G., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y . Disentan-
gling factors of variation via generative entangling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1210.5474 , 2012.
Duchi, J., Hazan, E., and Singer, Y . Adaptive subgradient
methods for online learning and stochastic optimization.
JMLR , 12(Jul):2121–2159, 2011.Eastwood, C. and Williams, C. A framework for the quanti-
tative evaluation of disentangled representations. In ICLR ,
2018.
Gini, C. W. Variability and mutability, contribution to the
study of statistical distributions and relations. Journal of
American Statistical Association , 66:534–544, 1971.
Goodfellow, I., Lee, H., Le, Q. V ., Saxe, A., and Ng, A. Y .
Measuring invariances in deep networks. In NIPS , 2009.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B.,
Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y .
Generative Adversarial Nets. In NIPS , 2014.
Goroshin, R., Bruna, J., Tompson, J., Eigen, D., and LeCun,
Y . Unsupervised learning of spatiotemporally coherent
metrics. In ICCV , 2015.
Gulrajani, I., Ahmed, F., Arjovsky, M., Dumoulin, V ., and
Courville, A. Improved training of wasserstein GANs. In
NIPS , 2017.
Higgins, I., Matthey, L., Pal, A., Burgess, C., Glorot, X.,
Botvinick, M., Mohamed, S., and Lerchner, A. Beta-
V AE: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained
variational framework. 2016.
Hinton, G. E., Krizhevsky, A., and Wang, S. D. Trans-
forming auto-encoders. In International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks , pp. 44–51. Springer, 2011.
Hoffman, M. D. and Johnson, M. J. ELBO surgery:
yet another way to carve up the variational evidence
lower bound. In Workshop in Advances in Approximate
Bayesian Inference, NIPS , 2016.
Hsu, W. N., Zhang, Y ., and Glass, J. Unsupervised learning
of disentangled and interpretable representations from
sequential data. In NIPS , 2017.
Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. Batch normalization: Accelerating
deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift.
InICML , 2015.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. In ICLR , 2015.
Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational
Bayes. 2014.
Kingma, D. P., Mohamed, S., Rezende, D. J., and Welling,
M. Semi-supervised learning with deep generative mod-
els. In NIPS , 2014.
Kivinen, J. J. and Williams, C. Transformation equivariant
boltzmann machines. In International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks , 2011.Disentangling by Factorising
Kulkarni, T., Whitney, W. F., Kohli, P., and Tenenbaum, J.
Deep convolutional inverse graphics network. In NIPS ,
2015.
Kumar, A., Sattigeri, P., and Balakrishnan, A. Variational
inference of disentangled latent concepts from unlabeled
observations. In ICLR , 2018.
Lake, B. M., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gersh-
man, S. J. Building machines that learn and think like
people. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , pp. 1–101, 2016.
Lenc, K. and Vedaldi, A. Understanding image represen-
tations by measuring their equivariance and equivalence.
InCVPR , 2015.
Liu, Z., Luo, P., Wang, X., and Tang, X. Deep learning
face attributes in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 3730–
3738, 2015.
Maddison, C. J., Mnih, A., and Teh, Y . W. The CONCRETE
distribution: A continuous relaxation of discrete random
variables. In ICLR , 2017.
Makhzani, A. and Frey, B. PixelGAN autoencoders. In
NIPS , 2017.
Makhzani, A., Shlens, J., Jaitly, N., Goodfellow, I., and
Frey, B. Adversarial autoencoders. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.05644 , 2015.
Mathieu, M. F., Zhao, J. J., Ramesh, A., Sprechmann, P.,
and LeCun, Y . Disentangling factors of variation in deep
representation using adversarial training. In NIPS , 2016.
Matthey, L., Higgins, I., Hassabis, D., and Lerchner,
A. dSprites: Disentanglement testing Sprites dataset.
https://github.com/deepmind/dsprites-dataset/, 2017.
Mescheder, L., Nowozin, S., and Geiger, A. Adversarial
variational Bayes: Unifying Variational Autoencoders
and Generative Adversarial Networks. In ICML , 2017.
Mnih, A. and Rezende, D. J. Variational inference for Monte
Carlo objectives. In ICML , 2016.
Mohamed, S. and Lakshminarayanan, B. Learn-
ing in implicit generative models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.03483 , 2016.
Nguyen, X., Wainwright, M. J., and Jordan, M. I. Estimating
divergence functionals and the likelihood ratio by convex
risk minimization. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory , 2010.
Nowozin, S., Cseke, B., and Tomioka, R. f-GAN: Training
generative neural samplers using variational divergence
minimization. In NIPS , 2016.Paysan, P., Knothe, R., Amberg, B., Romdhani, S., and
Vetter, T. A 3D face model for pose and illumination
invariant face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal
based Surveillance , pp. 296–301, 2009.
Perry, G., Rolls, E. T., and Stringer, S. M. Continuous trans-
formation learning of translation invariant representations.
Experimental Brain Research , 204(2):255–270, 2010.
Reed, S., Sohn, K., Zhang, Y ., and Lee, H. Learning to
disentangle factors of variation with manifold interaction.
InICML , 2014.
Rezende, D. J., Mohamed, S., and Wierstra, D. Stochas-
tic backpropagation and approximate inference in deep
generative models. In ICML , 2014.
Rosca, M., Lakshminarayanan, B., and Mohamed, S. Distri-
bution matching in variational inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.06847 , 2018.
Schmidhuber, J. Learning factorial codes by predictability
minimization. Neural Computation , 4(6):863–879, 1992.
Siddharth, N., Paige, B., Van de Meent, J. W., Desmaison,
A., Wood, F., Goodman, N. D., Kohli, P., and Torr, P.
H. S. Learning disentangled representations with semi-
supervised deep generative models. In NIPS , 2017.
Sønderby, C. K., Caballero, J., Theis, L., Shi, W., and
Husz ´ar, F. Amortised MAP inference for image super-
resolution. In ICLR , 2016.
Sugiyama, M., Suzuki, T., and Kanamori, T. Density-ratio
matching under the Bregman divergence: a uniﬁed frame-
work of density-ratio estimation. Annals of the Institute
of Statistical Mathematics , 64(5):1009–1044, 2012.
Watanabe, S. Information theoretical analysis of multivari-
ate correlation. IBM Journal of research and development ,
4(1):66–82, 1960.
Yang, H. H. and Amari, S. I. Adaptive online learning
algorithms for blind separation: maximum entropy and
minimum mutual information. Neural computation , 9(7):
1457–1482, 1997.