Learning Diverse Rankings with Multi-Armed Bandits

Filip Radlinski filip@cs.cornell.edu
Robert Kleinberg rdk@cs.cornell.edu
Thorsten Joachims tj@cs.cornell.edu
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
Abstract
Algorithms for learning to rank Web docu-
ments usually assume a document's relevance
is independent of other documents. This
leads to learned ranking functions that pro-
duce rankings with redundant results. In
contrast, user studies have shown that di-
versity at high ranks is often preferred. We
present two online learning algorithms that
directly learn a diverse ranking of documents
based on users' clicking behavior. We show
that these algorithms minimize abandon-
ment, or alternatively, maximize the proba-
bility that a relevant document is found in
the topkpositions of a ranking. Moreover,
one of our algorithms asymptotically achieves
optimal worst-case performance even if users'
interests change.
1. Introduction
Web search has become an essential component of the
Internet infrastructure, and has hence attracted sig-
nicant interest from the machine learning community
(e.g. Herbrich et al., 2000; Burges et al., 2005; Radlin-
ski & Joachims, 2005; Chu & Ghahramani, 2005; Met-
zler & Croft, 2005; Yue et al., 2007; Taylor et al.,
2008). The conventional approach to this learning-
to-rank problem has been to assume the availability
of manually labeled training data. Usually, this data
consists of a set of documents judged as relevant or not
to specic queries, or of pairwise judgments compar-
ing the relative relevance of pairs of documents. These
judgments are used to optimize a ranking function o
-
line, to a standard information retrieval metric, then
deploying the learned function in a live search engine.
We propose a new learning to rank problem formu-
lation that di
ers in three fundamental ways. First,
unlike most previous methods, we learn from usage
Appearing in Proceedings of the 25thInternational Confer-
ence on Machine Learning , Helsinki, Finland, 2008. Copy-
right 2008 by the author(s)/owner(s).data rather than manually labeled relevance judg-
ments. Usage data is available in much larger quan-
tities and at much lower cost. Moreover, unlike man-
ual judgments, which need to be constantly updated
to stay relevant, usage data naturally re
ects current
users' needs and the documents currently available.
Although some researchers have transformed usage
data into relevance judgments, or used it to generate
features (e.g. Joachims, 2002; Radlinski & Joachims,
2005; Agichtein et al., 2006), we go one step further
by directly optimizing a usage-based metric.
Second, we propose an online learning approach for
learning from usage data. As training data is being
collected, it immediately impacts the rankings shown.
This means the learning problem we address is regret
minimization, where the goal is to minimize the total
number of poor rankings displayed over alltime. In
particular, in this setting there is a natural tradeo
 be-
tween exploration and exploitation: It may be valuable
in the long run to present some rankings with unknown
documents, to allow training data about these docu-
ments to be collected. In contrast, in the short run
exploitation is typically optimal. With only few ex-
ceptions (e.g. Radlinski & Joachims, 2007), previous
work does not consider such an online approach.
Third and most importantly, except for (Chen &
Karger, 2006), previous algorithms for learning to rank
have considered the relevance of each document in-
dependently of other documents. This is re
ected in
the performance measures typically optimized, such
as Precision, Recall, Mean Average Precision (MAP)
(Baeza-Yates & Ribeiro-Neto, 1999) and Normalized
Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG) (Burges et al.,
2006). In fact, recent work has shown that these mea-
sures do not necessarily correlate with user satisfaction
(Turpin & Scholer, 2006). Additionally, it intuitively
stands to reason that presenting many slight varia-
tions of the same relevant document in web search re-
sults may increase the MAP or NDCG score, yet would
be suboptimal for users. Moreover, web queries often
have di
erent meanings for di
erent users (a canonical
example is the query jaguar ) suggesting that a ranking
with diverse documents may be preferable.Learning Diverse Rankings with Multi-Armed Bandits
We will show how clickthrough data can be used to
learn rankings maximizing the probability that any
new user will nd at least one relevant document high
in the ranking.
2. Related Work
The standard approach for learning to rank uses train-
ing data, in the form of judgments assessing the rele-
vance of individual documents to a query, to learn pa-
rametersfor a scoring function f(q;di;). Given a
new queryq, this function computes f(q;di;) for each
documentdiindependently and ranks documents by
decreasing score (e.g. Herbrich et al., 2000; Joachims,
2002; Burges et al., 2005; Chu & Ghahramani, 2005).
This also applies to recent algorithms that learn 
to maximize nonlinear performance measures such as
MAP (Metzler & Croft, 2005; Yue et al., 2007) and
NDCG (Burges et al., 2006; Taylor et al., 2008).
The theoretical model that justies ranking docu-
ments in this way is the probabilistic ranking principle
(Robertson, 1977). It suggests that documents should
be ranked by their probablility of relevance to the
query. However, the optimality of such a ranking relies
on the assumption that there are no statistical depen-
dencies between the probabilities of relevance among
documents { an assumption that is clearly violated in
practice. For example, if one document about jaguar
cars is not relevant to a user who issues the query
jaguar , other car pages become less likely to be rele-
vant. Furthermore, empirical studies have shown that
given a xed query, the same document can have dif-
ferent relevance to di
erent users (Teevan et al., 2007).
This undermines the assumption that each document
has a single relevance score that can be provided as
training data to the learning algorithm. Finally, as
users are usually satised with nding a small number
of, or even just one, relevant document, the usefulness
and relevance of a document does depend on other
documents ranked higher.
As a result, most search engines today attempt to elim-
inate redundant results and produce diverse rankings
that include documents that are potentially relevant to
the query for di
erent reasons. However, learning op-
timally diverse rankings using expert judgments would
require document relevance to be measured for di
er-
ent possible meanings of a query. While the TREC
interactive track1provides some documents labeled in
this way for a small number of queries, such document
collections are even more dicult to create than stan-
dard expert labeled collections.
1http://trec.nist.gov/data/t11 interactive/t11i.htmlSeveral non-learning algorithms for obtaining a diverse
ranking of documents from a non-diverse ranking have
been proposed. One common one is Maximal Marginal
Relevance (MMR) (Carbonell & Goldstein, 1998).
Given a similarity (relevance) measure between docu-
ments and queries sim 1(d;q) and a similarity measure
between pairs of documents sim 2(di;dj), MMR iter-
atively selects documents by repeatedly nding di=
argmaxd2Dsim 1(d;q) (1 ) maxdj2Ssim 2(d;dj)
whereSis the set of documents already selected and
is a tuning parameter. In this way MMR selects the
most relevant documents that are also di
erent from
any documents already selected.
Critically, MMR requires that the relevance function
sim 1(d;q), and the similarity function sim 2(di;dj) is
known. It is usual to obtain sim 1andsim 2using al-
gorithms such as those discussed above. The goal of
MMR is to rerank an already learned ranking (that of
ranking documents by decreasing sim 1score) to im-
prove diversity. All previous approaches of which we
are aware that optimize diversity similarly require a
relevance function to be learned prior to performing
a diversication step (Zhu et al., 2007; Zhang et al.,
2005; Zhai et al., 2003), with the exception of Chen
and Karger (2006). Rather, they require that a model
for estimating the probability a document is relevant,
given a query and other non-relevant documents, is
available. In contrast, we directly learn a diverse rank-
ing of documents using users' clicking behavior.
3. Problem Formalization
We address the problem of learning an optimally diver-
sied ranking of documents D=fd1;:::;dngfor one
xed query. Suppose we have a population of users,
where each user uiconsiders some subset of documents
AiD as relevant to the query, and the remainder of
the documents as non-relevant. Intuitively, users with
di
erent interpretations for the query would have dif-
ferent relevant sets, while users with similar interpre-
tations would have similar relevant sets.
At timet, we interact with user utwith relevant
setAt. We present an ordered set of kdocuments,
Bt= (b1(t);:::;bk(t)):The user considers the results
in order, and clicks on up to one document. The prob-
ability of user utclicking on document di(conditional
on the user not clicking on a document presented ear-
lier in the ranking) is assumed to be pti2[0;1]. We
refer to the vector of probabilities ( pti)i2Das the type
of userut. In the simplest case, we could take pti= 1
ifdi2Atand 0 otherwise, in which case the user
clicks on the rst relevant document or does not click
if no documents in Btare relevant. However, in reality
clicks tend to be noisy although more relevant docu-Learning Diverse Rankings with Multi-Armed Bandits
Algorithm 1 Ranked Explore and Commit
1:input: Documents ( d1;::;dn), parameters ;;k .
2:x d2k2=2log(2k=)e
3:(b1;:::;bk) karbitrary documents.
4:fori=1 . . . k do At every rank
5:8j: pj 0
6:forcounter=1 . . . x do Loop xtimes
7: forj=1 . . . n do over every document dj
8:bi dj
9: displayfb1;:::;bkgto user; record clicks
10: ifuser clicked on bithenpj pj+ 1
11: end for
12: end for
13:j argmaxjpj Commit to best document at this rank
14:bi dj
15:end for
ments are more likely to be clicked on. In our analysis,
we will take pti2[0;1].
We get payo
 1 if the user clicks, 0 if not. The goal is
to maximize the total payo
, summing over all time.
This payo
 represents the number of users who clicked
on any result, which can be interpreted as the user
nding at least one potentially relevant document (so
long asptiis higher when di2Atthan when di=2At).
The event that a user does not click is called aban-
donment since the user abandoned the search results.
Abandonment is an important measure of user satis-
faction because it indicates that users were presented
with search results of no potential interest.
4. Learning Algorithms
We now present two algorithms that directly mini-
mize the abandonment rate. At a high level, both
algorithms learn a marginal utility for each document
at each rank, displaying documents to maximize the
probability that a new user of the search system would
nd at least one relevant document within the top k
positions. The algorithms di
er in their assumptions.
4.1. Ranked Explore and Commit
The rst algorithm we present is a simple greedy strat-
egy that assumes that user interests and documents
do not change over time. As we will see, after T
time steps this algorithm achieves a payo
 of at least
(1 1=e )OPT O(k3n=2ln(k=)) with probability
at least 1 .OPT denotes the maximal payo
 that
could be obtained if the click probabilities ptiwere
known ahead of time for all users and documents, and
(1 1=e)OPT is the best obtainable polynomial time
approximation, as will be explained in Section 5.1.
As described in Algorithm 1, Ranked Explore andAlgorithm 2 Ranked Bandits Algorithm
1:initialize MAB 1(n);:::;MABk(n) Initialize MABs
2:fort = 1 . . . T do
3:fori = 1 . . . k do Sequentially select documents
4: ^bi(t) select-arm ( MABi)
5: if^bi(t)2fb1(t);::;bi 1(t)gthen Replace repeats
6:bi(t) arbitrary unselected document
7: else
8:bi(t) ^bi(t)
9: end if
10: end for
11: displayfb1(t);:::;bk(t)gto user; record clicks
12: fori = 1 . . . k do Determine feedback for MAB i
13: ifuser clicked bi(t)and ^bi(t) =bi(t)then
14:fit= 1
15: else
16:fit= 0
17: end if
18: update ( MABi;arm =^bi(t);reward =fit)
19: end for
20:end for
Commit (REC) iteratively selects documents for each
rank. At each rank position i, every document djis
presented a xed number xtimes, and the number of
clicks it receives during these presentations is recorded.
Afternxpresentations, the algorithm permanently as-
signs the document that received the most clicks to
the current rank, and moves on to the next rank.
4.2. Ranked Bandits Algorithm
Ranked Explore and Commit is purely greedy, mean-
ing that after each document is selected, this deci-
sion is never revisited. In particular, this means that
if user interests or documents change, REC can per-
form arbitrarily poorly. In contrast, the Ranked Ban-
dits Algorithm (RBA) achieves a combined payo
 of
(1 1=e)OPT O(kpTnlogn) afterTtime steps even
if documents and user interests change over time.
This algorithm leverages standard theoretical results
for multi-armed bandits. Multi-armed bandits (MAB)
are modeled on casino slot machines (sometimes called
one-armed bandits). The goal of standard MAB algo-
rithms is to select the optimal sequence of slot ma-
chines to play to maximize the expected total reward
collected. For further details, refer to (Auer et al.,
2002a). The ranked bandits algorithm runs an MAB
instance MABiforeach ranki. Each of the kcopies of
the multi-armed bandit algorithm maintains a value
(or index) for every document. When selecting the
ranking to display to users, the algorithm MAB 1is
responsible for choosing which document is shown at
rank 1. Next, the algorithm MAB 2determines whichLearning Diverse Rankings with Multi-Armed Bandits
document is shown at rank 2, unless the same docu-
ment was selected at the highest rank. In that case,
the second document is picked arbitrarily. This pro-
cess is repeated to select all top kdocuments.
Next, after a user considers up to the top kdocuments
in order and clicks on one or none, we need to update
the indices. If the user clicks on a document actually
selected by an MAB instance, the reward for the arm
corresponding to that document for the multi-armed
bandit at that rank is 1. The reward for the arms
corresponding to all other selected documents is 0. In
particular, note that the RBA treats the bandits corre-
sponding to each rank independently. Precise pseudo-
code for the algorithm is presented in Algorithm 2.
A generalization of this algorithm, in an abstract set-
ting without the application to Information Retrieval,
was discovered independently by Streeter and Golovin
(2007).
The actual MAB algorithm used for each MABiin-
stance is not critical, and in fact any algorithm for the
non-stochastic multi-armed bandit problem will suf-
ce. Our theoretical analysis only requires that:
The algorithm has a set Sofnstrategies.
In each period ta payo
 function ft:S![0;1] is
dened. This function is not revealed to the algo-
rithm, and may depend on the algorithm's choices
before time t.
In each period the algorithm chooses a (random)
elementyt2Sbased on the feedback revealed in
prior periods.
The feedback revealed in period tisft(yt).
The expected payo
s of the chosen strategies sat-
isfy:
TX
t=1E[ft(yt)]max
y2STX
t=1E[ft(y)] R(T)
whereR(T) is an explicit function in o(T) which
depends on the particular multi-armed bandit al-
gorithm chosen, and the expectation is over any
randomness in the algorithm. We will use the
Exp3 algorithm in our analysis, where R(T) =
O pTnlogn
(Auer et al., 2002b).
We will also later see that although these conditions
are needed to bound worst-case performance, better
practical performance may be obtained at the expense
of worst-case performance if they are relaxed.
5. Theoretical Analysis
We now present a theoretical analysis of the algorithms
presented in Section 4. First however, we discuss the
oine version of this optimization problem.5.1. The Oine Optimization Problem
The problem of choosing the optimum set of kdocu-
ments for a given user population is NP-hard, even if
all the information about the user population (i.e. the
set of relevant documents for each user) is given oine
and we restrict ourselves to pij2f0;1g. This is be-
cause selecting the optimal set of documents is equiva-
lent to the maximum coverage problem: Given a posi-
tive integer kand a collection of subsets S1;S2;:::;Sn
of anm-element set, nd kof the subsets whose union
has the largest possible cardinality.
The standard greedy algorithm for the maximum cov-
erage problem, translated to our setting, iteratively
chooses the document that is relevant to the most users
for whom a relevant document has not yet been se-
lected. This algorithm is a (1  1=e)-approximation
algorithm for this maximization problem (Nemhauser
et al., 1978). The (1  1=e) factor is optimal and
no better worst-case approximation ratio is achievable
in polynomial time unless NPDTIME 
nlog logn
(Khuller et al., 1997).
5.2. Analysis of Ranked Bandits Algorithm
We start by analyzing the Ranked Bandits Algorithm.
This algorithm works by simulating the oine greedy
algorithm, using a separate instance of the multi-
armed bandit algorithm for each step of the greedy
algorithm. Except for the sublinear regret term, the
combined payo
 is as high as possible without violat-
ing the hardness-of-approximation result stated in the
preceding paragraph.
To analyze the RBA, we rst restrict ourselves to users
who click on any given document with probability ei-
ther 0 or 1. We refer to this restricted type of user as a
deterministic user ; we will relax the requirement later.
Additionally, this analysis applies to a worst case (and
hence xed) sequence of users.
Further, it is useful to introduce some notation. For a
setAand a sequence B= (b1;b2;:::;bk), let
Gi(A;B) =
1 ifAintersectsfb1;:::;big
0 otherwise
gi(A;B) =Gi(A;B) Gi 1(A;B)
Recalling that Atis the set of documents relevant to
userut, we see that Gk(At;B) is the payo
 of present-
ingBto the user ut. Let
B= argmax
BTX
t=1Gk(At;B);
OPT =TX
t=1Gk(At;B):Learning Diverse Rankings with Multi-Armed Bandits
Recall that ( ^b1(t);:::; ^bk(t)) is the sequence of docu-
ments chosen by the algorithms MAB 1;:::;MABkat
timet, and that ( b1(t);:::;bk(t)) is the sequence of
documents presented to the user. Dene the feedback
functionfitfor algorithm MABiat timet, as follows:
fit(b) =
1 ifGi 1(At;Bt) = 0 andb2At
0 otherwise:
Note that the value of fitdened in the pseudocode for
the Ranked Bandits Algorithms is equal to fit(^bi(t)).
Lemma 1. For alli,
E"TX
t=1gi(At;Bt)#
1
kE"TX
t=1(Gk(At;B) Gi 1(At;Bt))#
 R(T)
=1
kOPT 1
kE"TX
t=1Gi 1(At;Bt)#
 R(T):
Proof. First, note that
gi(At;Bt)fit(^bi(t)): (1)
This is trivially true when fit(^bi(t)) = 0. When
fit(^bi(t)) = 1,Gi 1(At;Bt) = 0 and ^bi(t)2At:This
implies that bi(t) =^bi(t) and thatgi(At;Bt) = 1:
Now using the regret bound for MABiwe obtain
TX
t=1E[fit(^bi(t))]max
bTX
t=1E[fit(b)] R(T)
1
kE"X
b2BTX
t=1fit(b)#
 R(T):(2)
To complete the proof of the lemma, we will prove that
X
b2Bfit(b)Gk(At;B) Gi 1(At;Bt):(3)
The lemma follows immediately by combining (1)-(3).
Observe that the left side of (3) is a non-negative
integer, while the right side takes one of the values
f 1;0;1g:Thus, to prove (3) it suces to show that
the left side is greater than or equal to 1 whenever the
right side is equal to 1. The right side equals 1 only
whenGi 1(At;Bt) = 0 andAtintersectsB. In this
case it is clear that there exists at least one b2B
such thatfit(b) = 1, hence the left side is greater than
or equal to 1.
Theorem 1. The algorithm's combined payo
 after T
rounds satises:
E"TX
t=1Gk(At;Bt)#

1 1
e
OPT kR(T):(4)Proof. We will prove, by induction on i, that
OPT E"TX
t=1Gi(At;Bt)#

1 1
ki
OPT +iR(T):
(5)
The theorem follows by taking i=kand using the
inequality 
1 1
kk<1
e:
In the base case i= 0, inequality (5) is trivial. For the
induction step, let
Zi=OPT E"TX
t=1Gi(At;Bt)#
:
We have
Zi=Zi 1 E"TX
t=1gi(At;Bt)#
; (6)
and Lemma 1 says that
E"TX
t=1gi(At;Bt)#
1
kZi 1 R(T): (7)
Combining (6) with (7), we obtain
Zi
1 1
k
Zi 1+R(T):
Combining this with the induction hypothesis proves
(5).
The general case, in which user ui's type vector
(pij)j2Dis an arbitrary element of [0 ;1]D, can be re-
duced via a simple transformation to the case of de-
terministic users analyzed above. We replace user ui
with a random deterministic user ^ uiwhose type vector
^pi2f0;1gDis sampled using the following rule: the
random variable ^ pijhas distribution
^pij=
1 with probability pij
0 with probability 1  pij;
and these random variables are mutually independent.
Note that the clicking behavior of user uiwhen pre-
sented with a ranking Bisidentical to the clicking
behavior observed when a random user type ^ uiis sam-
pled from the above distribution, and the ranking B
is presented to this random user. Thus, if we apply
the specied transformation to users u1;u2;:::;uT,
obtaining a random sequence ^ u1;^u2;:::; ^uTof deter-
ministic users, this transformation changes neither the
algorithm's expected payo
 nor that of the optimum
rankingB. Thus, Theorem 1 for general users can
be deduced by applying the same theorem to the ran-
dom sequence ^ u1;:::; ^uTand taking the expectation of
the left and right sides of (4) over the random choices
involved in sampling ^ u1;:::; ^uT.Learning Diverse Rankings with Multi-Armed Bandits
Note also that Bis dened as the optimal subset of
kdocuments, and OPT is the payo
 of presenting B,
without specifying the order in which documents are
presented. However, the Ranked Bandits Algorithm
learns an order for the documents in addition to iden-
tifying a set of documents. In particular, given k0<k,
RBA(k0) would receive exactly the same feedback as
the rstk0instances of MABireceive when running
RBA(k). Hence any k0sized prex of the learned rank-
ing also has the same performance bound with respect
the appropriate smaller set B0.
Finally, it is worth noting that this analysis cannot
be trivially extended to non-binary payo
s, for exam-
ple when learning a ranking of web advertisements.
In particular, the greedy algorithm on which RBA is
based in the non-binary payo
 case can obtain a payo

that is a factor of k "below optimal, for any ">0.
5.3. Analysis of Ranked Explore and Commit
The analysis of the Ranked Explore and Commit
(REC) algorithm is analogous to that of the Ranked
Bandits algorithm, except that the equivalents of
Lemma 1 and Theorem 1 are only true with high prob-
ability after t0=nxk time steps of exploration have
occurred. Let Bdenote the ranking selected by REC.
Lemma 2. Letx= 2k2=2log(2k=). AssumeAtis
drawn i.i.d. from a xed distribution of user types. For
anyi, with probability 1 =k,
E"TX
t=t0gi(At;B)#
1
kE"TX
t=t0(Gk(At;B) Gi 1(At;B))#
 
kT:
Proof Outline. First note that in this setting, Band
OPT are dened in expectation over the Atdrawn.
For any document, by Hoe
ding's inequality, with
probability 1 =2kthe true payo
 of that document
explored at rank iis within=2kof the observed mean
payo
. Hence the document selected at rank iis within
=kof the payo
 of the best document available at
ranki. Now, the same proof as for Lemma 1 applies,
although with a di
erent regret R(T).
Theorem 2. With probability (1 ), the algorithm's
combined payo
 after Trounds satises:
E"TX
t=1Gk(At;B)#

1 1
e
OPT T nkx (8)
Proof Outline. Applying Lemma 2 for all i2f1;::;kg,
with probability (1  k=k ) = (1 ) the conclusion
of the Lemma holds for all i.Next, an analogous proof as for Theorem 1 applies,
except replacing R(T) with
kTand noting that the
regret during the nkx exploration steps is at most 1
for every time step.
It is interesting to note that, in contrast to the Ranked
Bandits Algorithm, this algorithm can be adapted to
the case where clicked documents provide real valued
payo
s. The only modication necessary is that docu-
ments should always be presented by decreasing payo

value. However, we do not address this extension fur-
ther due to space constraints.
6. Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the Ranked Bandits and
Ranked Explore and Commit algorithms, as well as
two variants of RBA, with simulations using a user
and document model.
We chose a model that produces a user population and
document distribution designed to be realistic yet al-
low us to evaluate the performance of the presented
algorithms under di
erent levels of noise in user click-
ing behavior. Our model rst assigns each of 20 users
to topics of interest using a Chinese Restaurant Pro-
cess (Aldous, 1985) with parameter = 3. This led
to a mean of 6.5 unique topics, with topic popularity
decaying according to a power law. Taking a collection
of 50 documents, we then randomly assigned as many
documents to each topic as there were users assigned
to the topic, leading to topics with more users having
more relevant documents. We set each document as-
signed to a topic as relevant to all users assigned to
that topic, and all other documents as non relevant.
The probabilities of a user clicking on relevant and
non-relevant documents were set to constants pRand
pNRrespectively.
We tested by drawing one user uniformly from the
user population at each time step, and presented this
user with the ranking selected by each algorithm, using
k= 5. We report the average number of time steps
where the user clicked on a result, and the average
number of time steps where at least one of the pre-
sented documents was relevant to the user. All num-
bers we report are averages over 1,000 algorithm runs.
6.1. Performance Without Click Noise
We start by evaluating how well the REC and RBA
algorithms maximize the clickthrough rate in the sim-
plest case when pR= 1 andpNR= 0. We also compare
their performance to the clickthrough rate that the
same users would generate if presented with a static
system that orders documents by decreasing true prob-Learning Diverse Rankings with Multi-Armed Bandits
 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1
400,000 350,000 300,000 250,000 200,000 150,000 100,000 50,000  0Clickthrough Rate (1-Abandonment)
Number of User PresentationsBest possible performance (OPT)
Lower bound performance (1-1/e)OPTRanked Bandits Algorithm
Ranked Explore and Commit (x=50)
Ranked Explore and Commit (x=1000)
Popularity-Based Static Ranking
Figure 1. Clickthrough rate of the learned ranking as a
function of the number of times the ranking was presented
to users.
ability of relevance to the users assuming document
relevances are independent. Figure 1 shows that both
REC and RBA perform well above the static baseline
and well above the performance guarantee provided by
the theoretical results. This is not surprising, as the
(1 1=e)OPT bound is a worst-case bound. In fact,
we see that REC with x= 1000 nearly matches the
performance of the best possible ranking after nish-
ing its initial exploration phase. We also see that the
exploration parameter of REC plays a signicant role
in the performance, with lower exploration leading to
faster convergence but slightly lower nal performance.
Note that despite REC performing best here, the rank-
ing learned by REC is xed after the exploration steps
have been performed. If user interests and documents
change over time, the performance of REC could fall
arbitrarily. In contrast, RBA is guaranteed to remain
near or above the (1  1=e)OPT bound.
6.2. E
ect of Click Noise
In Figure 1, the clickthrough rate and fraction of users
who found a relevant document in the top kpositions
is identical (since users click if and only if they are
presented with a relevant document). In contrast,
Figure 2 shows how the fraction of users who nd
a relevant document decays as the probability of a
user clicking becomes noisier. The gure presents the
performance lines for REC and RBA across a range
of click probabilities, from ( pR= 1;pNR= 0) to
(pR= 0:7;pNR= 0:3). We see that both algorithms
decay gracefully: as the clicks become noisier noisy,
the fraction of users presented with a relevant docu-
ments decays slowly.
6.3. Optimizing Practical E
ectiveness
Despite the theoretical results shown earlier, it would
be surprising if an algorithm designed for the worst
 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1
400,000 350,000 300,000 250,000 200,000 150,000 100,000 50,000  0Fraction of Rankings with a Relevant Document
Number of User PresentationsBest possible relevance performance
Ranked Bandits Algorithm
Ranked Explore and Commit (x=1000)1.00 / 0.00;  0.95 / 0.05
0.90 / 0.10
0.85 / 0.15
0.80 / 0.20
0.75 / 0.25
0.70 / 0.30Figure 2. E
ect of noise in clicking behavior on the quality
of the learned ranking.
case had best average case performance. Figure 3
shows the clickthrough rate (which the algorithms op-
timize), and fraction of users who nd relevant doc-
uments (which is of more interest to information re-
trieval practitioners), for variants building on the in-
sights of the ranked bandits idea. Specically, two
variants of RBA that have the best performance we
could obtain in our simulation are shown. We found
that using a UCB1-based multi-armed bandit algo-
rithm (Auer et al., 2002a) in place of EXP3 improves
the performance of RBA substantially when user inter-
ests are static. Note however, that UCB1 does not sat-
isfy the constraints presented in Section 4.2 because it
assumes rewards are identically distributed over time,
an assumption violated in our setting when changes in
the documents presented above rank ialter the reward
distribution at rank i. Nevertheless, we see that this
modication substantially improves the performance
of RBA. We expect such an algorithm to perform best
when few documents are prone to radical shifts in pop-
ularity.
7. Conclusions and Extensions
We have presented a new formulation of the learning
to rank problem that explicitly takes into account the
relevance of di
erent documents being interdependent.
We presented, analyzed and evaluated two algorithms
and two variants for this learning setting. We have
shown that the learning problem can be solved in a
theoretically sound manner, and that our algorithms
can be expected to perform reasonably in practice.
We plan to extend this work by addressing the non-
binary document relevance settings, and perform em-
pirical evaluations using real users and real documents.
Furthermore, we plan to investigate how prior knowl-
edge can be incorporated into the algorithms to im-
prove speed of convergence. Finally, we plan to inves-Learning Diverse Rankings with Multi-Armed Bandits
 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1
106105104103102Clickthrough Rate (1-Abandonment)
Number of User PresentationsBest possible clickthrough rate without noise (OPT)
Ranked Bandits Algorithm
Modified-EXP3 Ranked Bandits Variant
Modified-UCB1 Ranked Bandits Variant
Ranked Explore and Commit (x=50)
Ranked Explore and Commit (x=1000)
Popularity-Based Static Ranking
 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1
106105104103102Fraction of Rankings with a Relevant Document
Number of User PresentationsBest possible relevance performance
Ranked Bandits Algorithm
Modified-EXP3 Ranked Bandits Variant
Modified-UCB1 Ranked Bandits Variant
Ranked Explore and Commit (x=50)
Ranked Explore and Commit (x=1000)
Popularity-Based Static Ranking
Figure 3. In a practical setting, it may be benecial to use a
variant of RBA to obtain improved performance at the cost
of weaker theoretical guarantees. Performance is shown in
realistic settings pR= 0:8,pNR= 0:2.
tigate if the bandits at di
erent ranks can be coupled
to improve the rate at which RBA converges.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the reviewers for helpful com-
ments. This work was supported by NSF Career
Award CCF-0643934, NSF Award CCF-0729102, NSF
Career Award 0237381 and a gift from Google. The
rst author was supported by a Microsoft Research
Fellowship.
References
Agichtein, E., Brill, E., & Dumais, S. (2006). Improving
web search ranking by incorporating user behavior. In
SIGIR (pp. 19{26).
Aldous, D. J. (1985). Exchangeability and related topics.
Ecole d' Et e de Probabilit es de Saint-Flour XIII (pp. 1{
198).
Auer, P., Cesa-Bianchi, N., & Fischer, P. (2002a). Finite-
time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. Ma-
chine Learning ,47, 235{256.
Auer, P., Cesa-Bianchi, N., Freund, Y., & Schapire, R. E.
(2002b). The non-stochastic multi-armed bandit prob-
lem. SIAM Journal of Computing ,32, 48{77.Baeza-Yates, R., & Ribeiro-Neto, B. (1999). Modern in-
formation retrieval . New York, NY: Addison Wesley.
Burges, C., Shaked, T., Renshaw, E., Lazier, A., Deeds,
M., Hamilton, N., & Hullender, G. (2005). Learning to
rank using gradient descent. In ICML (pp. 89{96).
Burges, C. J. C., Ragno, R., & Le, Q. V. (2006). Learning
to rank with nonsmooth cost functions. In NIPS (pp.
193{200). MIT Press.
Carbonell, J., & Goldstein, J. (1998). The use of MMR,
diversity-based reranking for reordering documents and
producing summaries. In SIGIR (pp. 335{336).
Chen, H., & Karger, D. R. (2006). Less is more: Proba-
bilistic models for retrieving fewer relevant documents.
In SIGIR (pp. 429{436).
Chu, W., & Ghahramani, Z. (2005). Gaussian processes
for ordinal regression. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search ,6, 1019{1041.
Herbrich, R., Graepel, T., & Obermayer, K. (2000). Large
margin rank boundaries for ordinal regression. Advances
in Large Margin Classiers (pp. 115{132).
Joachims, T. (2002). Optimizing search engines using click-
through data. In KDD (pp. 132{142).
Khuller, S., Moss, A., & Naor, J. (1997). The budgeted
maximum coverage problem. Information Processing
Letters ,70, 39{45.
Metzler, D., & Croft, W. B. (2005). A markov random eld
model for term dependencies. In SIGIR (pp. 472{479).
Nemhauser, G. L., Wolsey, L. A., & Fisher, M. L. (1978).
An analysis of approximation for maximizing submodu-
lar set functions. Mathematical Programming ,14, 265{
294.
Radlinski, F., & Joachims, T. (2005). Query chains: Learn-
ing to rank from implicit feedback. In KDD (pp. 239{
248).
Radlinski, F., & Joachims, T. (2007). Active exploration
for learning rankings from clickthrough data. In KDD
(pp. 570{579).
Robertson, S. E. (1977). The probability ranking principle
in IR. Journal of Documentation ,33, 294{304.
Streeter, M., & Golovin, D. (2007). An online algorithm
for maximizing submodular functions (Technical Report
CMU-CS-07-171). Carnegie Mellon University.
Taylor, M. J., Guiver, J., Robertson, S. E., & Minka, T.
(2008). Softrank: Optimizing non-smooth ranking met-
rics. In WSDM (pp. 77{86).
Teevan, J., Dumais, S. T., & Horvitz, E. (2007). Charac-
terizing the value of personalizing search. In SIGIR (pp.
757{758).
Turpin, A., & Scholer, F. (2006). User performance versus
precision measures for simple search tasks. In SIGIR
(pp. 11{18).
Yue, Y., Finley, T., Radlinski, F., & Joachims, T. (2007). A
support vector method for optimizing average precision.
In SIGIR (pp. 271{278).
Zhai, C., Cohen, W. W., & La
erty, J. (2003). Beyond
independent relevance: Methods and evaluation metrics
for subtopic retrieval. In SIGIR (pp. 10{17).
Zhang, B., Li, H., Liu, Y., Ji, L., Xi, W., Fan, W., Chen,
Z., & Ma, W.-Y. (2005). Improving web search results
using anity graph. In CIKM (pp. 504{511).
Zhu, X., Goldberg, A. B., Gael, J. V., & Andrzejewski, D.
(2007). Improving diversity in ranking using absorbing
random walks. Proceedings of NAACL HLT .